Chapter 12: Intensional Inference 
Abstract   In this chapter we make precise the notion of “intensional inheritance,” by which is meant inheritance based on “properties” or “patterns.” We have men-tioned intensional or mixed inheritance relationships here and there previously, but have not formally defined them. 
12.1  Introduction We have already sketched out the basic notion of intensional inheritance used in PLN:  we define intensional inheritance by associating entities with pattern-sets, so that, e.g., fish would be associated with fishPAT, the set of all patterns associated with fish. The intensional inheritance between fish and whale is then defined as the Subset relationship between fishPAT and whalePAT, and the composite Inheri-tance between two entities is defined as the disjunction of the Subset and Inten-sionalInheritance between the entities. However, the concept of “pattern” used here was not formally defined previously; that is one of our tasks here. Before getting into formal details however, the conceptual foundations of the intension/extension distinction are worth reviewing in more depth because they become somewhat subtle. Intuitively, for instance, we might say:  Subset whale fish <0> IntensionalInheritance whale fish <.7>  Yet one might argue that the IntensionalInheritance relation is unnecessary here, because using only SubsetRelationships we could reason using PLN that  Subset fish (lives_in_water AND swims) Subset whale (lives_in_water AND swims) |- Subset fish whale <tv>  where tv.s > 0.  But the problem is that this abductive inference would be based on the errone-ous assumption that fish and whale are independent in (lives_in_water AND 

Probabilistic Logic Networks 250  swims). It would be overridden, for example, by textbook knowledge giving a definition of a fish as a complex predicate combining various attributes. What we want with intensional inheritance is some way of saying that fish inherits from whale that is NOT overridden by textbook knowledge. This is provided by the re-course to pattern-sets. Inference on composite InheritanceRelationships, we contend, better captures the essence of human commonsense reasoning than reasoning on SubsetRelation-ships. When we say something like  “Life is a bowl of (half-rotten) cherries”  we’re not merely doing Bayesian inference on the members of the sets “life” and “bowl of (half-rotten) cherries” – we’re noting an inheritance on the association or pattern level, which has a strength greater than would be obtained via Bayesian in-ference applied in the standard extensional way. Philosophically, the issue is not that probability theory is wrong; the issue is that the most straightforward way of applying probability theory is not in accordance with common human practice, and that in this case common human practice has a good reason for being roughly the way it is (the reason being that finding similarities based on common patterns rather than common members is often useful for understanding a world in which many more patterns exist than would be expected at random). 
12.2  Probabilistic Pattern Theory Now we introduce the formal definition of the concept of pattern – a notion central to our analysis of intension but also highly significant in its own right. In Goertzel (1993, 1993a, 1997) a mathematical theory of pattern is outlined, based on algorithmic information theory. The conceptual foundation of that theory is the notion of a pattern as a “representation as something simpler.” In Goertzel (2006), a modification to pattern theory is presented in which the algorithmic-information notions are replaced with probability-theoretic notions, but the conceptual spirit of the original pattern theory is preserved. Here we give a brief outline of probabilis-tic pattern theory, with PLN applications in mind.  
12.2.1  Association First, we introduce the notion of association. We will say that a predicate F is associated with another predicate G if  
! PFG()>PF¬G() 

251  Chapter 12: Intensional Inference That is, the presence of F is a positive indicator for the presence of G. The degree of association may be quantified as  
! ASSOCF,G()=PFG()"PF¬G()[ ]+   (where [x]+ denotes the positive part of x, which is x if x>0 and 0 otherwise).  The association-structure of G may be defined as the fuzzy set of predicates F that are associated with G, where ASSOC is the fuzzy-set membership function. Of course, the same definition can be applied to concepts or individuals rather than predicates. One may also construct the “causal association-structure” of a predicate G, which is defined the same way, except with temporal quantification. One intro-duces a time-lag T, and then defines  ASSOC(F,G; T) =  [P(F is true at time S+T | G is true at time T) –  P(F is true at time S+T|~G is true at time T)]+  The temporal version may be interpreted in terms of possible-worlds semantics; i.e.,  P(F at time S+T|G at time T)) = the probability that the entity A will be satisfied in a random universe at time A, given that G is satisfied in that universe at time T-A  P(F) = the probability that predicate F will be sat-isfied in a random universe, generically  If A and B are concepts or individuals rather than predicates, one can define ASSOC(A,B;T) by replacing each of A and B with an appropriately defined predicate. For instance, we can replace A with the predicate FA defined by  ExtensionalEquivalence  Evaluation FA U  Subset A U 
12.2.2  From Association to Pattern From association to pattern is but a small step. A pattern in a predicate F is something that is associated with F, but is simpler than F. A pattern in an entity A is defined similarly. 

Probabilistic Logic Networks 252  We must assume there is some measure c() of complexity. Then we may define the fuzzy-set membership function called the “pattern-intensity”, defined as, e.g.,  IN(F,G) = [c(G) – c(F)]+ [P(F | G) - P(F|~G)]+  There is also a temporal version, of course, defined as  IN(F,G;T) = [c(G;T) – c(F;T)]+ * ASSOC(F,G;T)  The definition of complexity referenced here can be made in several different ways. Harking back to traditional pattern theory, one can use algorithmic informa-tion theory, introducing some reference Turing machine and defining c(X) as the length in bits of X expressed on that reference machine. In this case, complexity is independent of time-lag T. Or one can take a probabilistic approach to defining complexity by introducing some reference process H, and defining  c(F;T) = ASSOC(G,H;T)  In this case we may write  IN[H](F,G;T) = [ASSOC(F,H;T) – ASSOC(F,G;T)]+ * ASSOC(F,G;T)  Notation-wise, typically we will suppress the H and T dependencies and just write IN(F,G) as a shorthand for IN[H](F,G;T), but of course this doesn’t mean the pa-rameters H and T are unimportant. Note the dependence upon the underlying computational model is generally suppressed in both traditional pattern theory and algorithmic information theory. It’s worth noting that this approach can essentially replicate the algorithmic in-formation theory approach to complexity. Suppose that M is a system that spits out bit strings of length <=N – choosing each bit at random, one by one, and then stopping when it gets to a bit string that represents a self-delimiting program on a given reference Turing machine. Next, define the predicate H as being True at a given point in time only if the system M is present and operational at that point in time. Next, for each bit string B of length <=N consider the predicate F[B](U,T) that returns True if B is present in possible-universe U at time T and False other-wise. Then it is clear that P(F[B]) is effectively zero (in a universe without a pro-gram randomly spitting out bit strings, the chance of a random bit string occurring is low). On the other hand, -log( P(F[B] at time S | H at time S-T) ) is roughly equal to the length of B. So for this special predicate H and the special predicates F[B], the complexity as defined above is basically equal to the negative logarithm of the program length. Algorithmic information theory emerges as a special case of the probabilistic notion of complexity.  

253  Chapter 12: Intensional Inference We can introduce a notion of relative pattern here – which is useful if patterns need to be calculated contextually. If we assume K as background knowledge, then we can define  ASSOC(F,G|K) = [P(F | G & K) - P(F|~G & K)]+  and  ASSOC(F, G| K ; T) =  [P(F at time S+T | G & K at time T) –  P(F at time S+T|~G & K at time T)]+  and  IN(F,G|K;T) = [c(G|K;T) – c(F|K;T)]+ * ASSOC(F,G|K;T) IN[H](F,G|K;T) = [ASSOC(F,H|K;T) – ASSOC(F,G|K;T)]+ * ASSOC(F,G|K;T)  Using these ideas, associated with any concept or predicate, we may construct a set called the “structure” of that entity. We may do this in (at least) two ways:   • The associative structure, which consists of the set of all observations and concepts that are associated with the entity • The pattern structure, which is the set of all observations and concepts that are patterns in the entity  For example, returning to our friend Stripedog, we may call these two sets stripedog_ASSOC and stripedog_PAT. Note that stripedog_ASSOC and stripe-dog_PAT are sets of observations or concepts, whereas stripedog, as defined above, is a set of sets of observations. stripedog is a fuzzy set (as well as a fuzzy cat), since the truth-value of the Evaluation relationship  Evaluation FStripedog $X  need not be Boolean. And according to the definitions given above, stripe-dog_ASSOC is also a fuzzy set because it’s not always entirely clear to what ex-tent a given entity is associated with the individual Stripedog. 
12.3  Intensional Inheritance Relationships Now we will use the concepts of the previous section to give a novel perspec-tive on the notion of intensional inheritance, as qualitatively introduced above. Suppose we want to compare our orange cat, Stripedog, to an orange (a particular 

Probabilistic Logic Networks 254  fruit; let’s name it orange_77). The set of entities stripedog_PAT associated with Stripedog includes observations such as  "orange is observed by me"  But this same observation is also included in orange_77_PAT. From this and other overlapping items, we may calculate that the probability associated with the rela-tionship  ExtensionalSimilarity stripedog_PAT orange_77_PAT  is reasonably high. In this way, we arrive as a similarity between an orange cat and an orange fruit. Note that no individual orange cats are orange fruits. Nor do any sets of observa-tions need to be identifiers for both orange cats and orange fruits. Rather, all that’s observed in the above similarity relationship is that there exists an overlap be-tween the set of observations corresponding to the orange cat and the set of obser-vations or properties corresponding to the orange fruit. So based on the above we cannot say  ExtensionalSimilarity stripedog orange_77  In fact this latter relationship may have a probability of zero. As noted earlier, a similar effect could be obtained via use of abductive infer-ence. If one observes that  Subset stripedog orange Subset orange_77 orange  and then uses Bayes’ rule to calculate  Subset orange orange_77  and then uses PLN deduction to calculate  Subset stripedog orange Subset orange orange_77 |- Subset stripedog orange_77  one will obtain a nonzero truth-value for the conclusion. However, this inference is based upon the erroneous assumption that stripedog and orange_77 are inde-pendent inside the set “orange.” While it is nice that erroneous assumptions can sometimes lead to useful results, this is not a generally sound basis for common-sense inference. In practice it will lead to much lower strength values than humans 

255  Chapter 12: Intensional Inference typically obtain, because of the low strength values frequently produced by Bayes’ rule. We feel that looking at pattern and association sets provides a better qualita-tive model of human commonsense inference in many cases – a perspective to be elaborated below. Based on this conceptual and mathematical line of thinking, there are several ways to structure a pattern-based reasoning system. One approach would be to construct separate terms for C, C_ASSOC and C_PAT, corresponding to each in-dividual. Sets of individuals, such as the set of cats, would also spawn such dis-tinct terms; there would be a cat term defined as the set of individual cats, and  cat_ASSOC and cat_PAT terms defined as the set of observations associated with individual cats. Consistently with the above, the membership function of cat_ASSOC would be defined as  [ P(cat| E) – P(cat|~E) ]+  where P(cat) means P(some element of the set of cats is observed), which is equivalent to P(some identifier of some cat is observed). The membership function of cat_PAT would be defined similarly as  [c(cat) – c(E)]+ * [ P(cat| E) – P(cat|~E) ]+  However, this is not the implementation we have chosen. We believe this du-plication of terms would be conceptually awkward – it doesn’t reflect the way human commonsense reasoning operates. Rather, we humans seem to fairly freely mix up reasoning about patterns with reasoning about sets of individuals. PLN is designed to enable this mixing-up, while at the same time allowing a distinction to be made clearly when this is appropriate. In order to do this, we introduce the notion of an IntensionalInheritance rela-tionship. Subset, as defined above, has a truth-value defined simply by conditional probability. IntensionalInheritance, on the other hand, is a special relationship de-fined by the convention that, e.g.,  IntensionalInheritance stripedog orange_77  means  Subset stripedog_ASSOC orange_77_ASSOC  Formally, we may introduce the ASSOC operator, defined as  ExtensionalEquivalence Member $X (ExOut ASSOC $C)  AND   ExtensionalImplication    Subset $Y $E 

Probabilistic Logic Networks 256     Subset $Y $C    NOT     ExtensionalImplication     Subset $Y $E     NOT [Subset $Y $C]   and then define the associational version of IntensionalInheritance via the relation-ship   ExtensionalEquivalence  IntensionalInheritance_ASSOC $X $Y  Subset (ExOut ASSOC $X) (ExOut ASSOC $Y)  Next, we may define the ASSOC variant of the Inheritance relationship via  ExtensionalEquivalence Inheritance_ASSOC $X $Y  OR Subset $X $Y IntensionalInheritance_ASSOC $X $Y  And, analogously to the above, we may define a symmetric mixed inten-sional/extensional relationship,  Similarity_ASSOC A B <tv> = OR ExtSim A B <tv1> ExtSim A_ASSOC B_ASSOC <tv2>  Of course, one can rewrite the above definitions using PAT instead of ASSOC. On the other hand, if we want to use both association-structure and pattern-structure, then in fact things get a little more complicated. We have three different kinds of inheritance to be disjunctively combined; e.g.,  ExtensionalEquivalence Inheritance_ASSOC_PAT $X $Y  OR Subset $X $Y IntensionalInheritance_ASSOC $X $Y IntensionalInheritance_PAT $X $Y  Typically we will leave off the qualifiers and just refer to Inheritance rather than Inheritance_ASSOC, etc. 

257  Chapter 12: Intensional Inference Note a significant difference from NARS here. In NARS, it is assumed that X inherits from Y if X extensionally inherits from Y but Y intensionally inherits from (inherits properties from) X. We take a different approach here. We say that X inherits from Y if X’s members are members of Y, and the observations associ-ated with X are also associated with Y. The duality of properties and members is taken to be provided via Bayes’ rule, where appropriate.  By making frequent use of this kind of Inheritance relationship in PLN we are making the philosophical assertion that commonsense inference habitually mixes up extensional and intensional inheritance, as defined here, in a disjunctive way. Clearly this particular way of combining probabilities is not mathematically “nec-essary” or natural in the sense that conditional probabilities are. However, we con-tend that it is cognitively natural. We believe that it is very cognitively valuable to calculate intensional inheri-tance and similarity values directly based on the above formulas – and use these together with extensional inheritance and similarity values within PLN inference. This is not hard to do in practice – it’s merely a matter of arranging conditional probability calculations in a different way; a way motivated by human psychology and pattern theory rather than probability theory proper. It is a credit to the flexi-bility of the PLN framework that it supports this kind of variation so easily. We should note that the calculation of  Intensional Inheritance A B  involves a heuristic approximation because the probabilities inside, for instance, 
! "ASSOCA()C1 and 
! "ASSOCA()C2, where 
! " represents the fuzzy membership func-tion (and  
! "ASSOC$C()$X is simply a different notation for the truth value of Member $X (ExOut ASSOC $C))are not, in general, independent for the two properties 
! C1 and 
! C2.  One way to minimize this sort of independence-assumption-based error is to choose a set of properties that are relatively independent of each other -- a sort of approximately-orthogonal ontology spanning concept-space. This same sort of ap-proximately-orthogonal decomposition may also be useful in default inference which we discuss in chapter 13. 
12.3.1  Intensional Term Probabilities Next, we touch on some mathematical issues raised by these constructions. Since we’re asking a term like stripedog to serve as a proxy for two or more terms – stripedog and stripedog_ASSOC and stripedog_PAT – it would seem that the term should have several, separate term probabilities:   

Probabilistic Logic Networks 258  • An extensional term probability, indicating the extent to which a ran-dom observation-set is an identifier for stripedog and counts as an ob-servation of stripedog • Intensional term probabilities, indicating the extent to which a random observation is associated with, or is a pattern in, stripedog  We can define a composite term truth-value via  PInheritance($X) = OR( P($X), PASS($X), PPAT($X))  Obviously these Inheritance term-probabilities go naturally with Inheritance rela-tionships, whereas the purely extensional term probabilities go naturally with Sub-set relationships.   
12.4  Truth-value Conversion Formulas Next, the question arises how to convert between the extensional and mixed versions of inheritance relationships. Taking the ASSOC version of Inheritance for simplicity, the conversion rule  Inheritance A B |- Subset A B  has the form  OR(X,Y) |- Y  and the conversion rule  Subset A B |- Inheritance A B  has the form  X |- X OR Y 

259  Chapter 12: Intensional Inference Obviously these are badly underdetermined inference rules, and the only solu-tions are simple heuristic ones. In the first case, we use the heuristic that  s = (OR(X,Y).tv.s Y.tv.s = (s-c)/(1-c)  where c is a constant that may be set equal to the average strength of all Intension-alInheritance relations in the system’s memory. In the second case we use the heu-ristic that  s = X.tv.s  (OR(X,Y)).tv.s = c + (1-c)s  where c is defined the same way. 
12.5  Intensional Boolean Operators Next, we turn to the intensional versions of the standard Boolean operators dis-cussed in the previous chapter. In general, in PLN we may consider Boolean op-erators to act either purely extensionally, purely intensionally, or in a mixed inten-sional/extensional manner. For instance, one may consider (A AND B) purely extensionally, as was done above, by taking the intersection of the sets of mem-bers of A and B. This is the default and the simplest approach, but not always the best route. Or, one may also consider (A AND B) purely intensionally, by taking the intersection of the sets of patterns associated with A and B. In this way, along with the standard (extensional) AND, OR, and NOT, we may define operators such as ANDInt and ORInt. And, as it happens, certain combinations of intensional and extensional Boo-lean operations are more useful than others. For instance, it generally makes sense to pair extensional intersection with intensional union: the members of the inter-section of A and B will generally share the properties of both A and B. Thus we may define (A ANDMix B) as the term containing the intersection of the exten-sional relationships of A and B, and the union of the intensional relationships of A and B. Similarly, (A ORMix B) is the term containing the union of the extensional relationships of A and B, and the intersection of the intensional relationships of A and B. These various operators may be useful for generating new concepts to be util-ized in future inferences. For instance, (cat ANDInt dog) is a category of hypotheti-cal creatures sharing the properties of both cats and dogs. On the other hand, both (cat ANDMix pet) and (cat ANDExt pet) are the interpretations of the informal con-cept “the set of pet cats” but may be different fuzzy sets, because both cat and pet may have intensional relationships that were not derived from analysis of the members of these sets (but were derived, perhaps, from natural language interpre-

Probabilistic Logic Networks 260  tation). In (cat ANDMix pet) these properties are carried over to the intersection but in (cat ANDExt pet) they are not. Apart from these logical operators, it may also be interesting to create new terms by simply taking the union or intersection of all relationships belonging to two terms A and B. However, it is important to understand that this kind of sim-plistic intersection and union is not the most conceptually natural approach in terms of the logic of either intension or extension. 
12.6  Doing Inference on Inheritance Relationships Having defined generic Inheritance as a disjunction of extensional and inten-sional inheritance, it is now natural to ask whether there are special inference rules for dealing with intensional and generic Inheritance relationships.  For instance, suppose we have  IntensionalInheritance A B IntensionalInheritance B C  Can we then conclude  IntensionalInheritance A C  via “intensional deduction”? In fact, it seems that the best way to deal with this kind of situation is to use the definition of intensional inheritance in terms of probabilities. From   IntensionalInheritance A B  along with P(A) and P(B), one can figure out P(A|B); and similarly from  IntensionalInheritance B C  one can figure out P(C|B). Using ordinary (extensional) deduction one can then figure out P(C|A), and then from this plus P(C) and P(A) one can calculate the strength of  IntensionalInheritance A C  There is thus no need for a special “intensional deduction rule,” and the same basic method holds for other inference rules. What about mixed inference? Sup-pose we have  Inheritance A B 

261  Chapter 12: Intensional Inference Inheritance B C  Can  Inheritance A C  be concluded? Again, the story is a bit more complicated. The best thing is to re-cord information separately about extensional and intensional inheritance. We can then combine them as weighted combinations of the following four types of infer-ence:  1)   ExtensionalInheritance A B     ExtensionalInheritance B C       |-       ExtensionalInheritance A C  2)    IntensionalInheritance A B       IntensionalInheriatnce B C       |-       IntensionalInheritance A C  3)    ExtensionalInheritance A B       IntesionalInheritance B C       |-       Inheritance A C (mixed Extensional/Intensional)  4)    IntensionalInheritance A B     ExtensionalInheritance B C       Inheritance B C (mixed)  On the other hand, sometimes one has information only about inheritance rather than about extensional and intensional inheritance particularly. This may happen, for instance, if one is dealing with knowledge parsed from natural lan-guage. The sentence “cats are animals” is best interpreted in terms of mixed in-heritance. So if we are doing reasoning of the form  cats are animals animals are ugly |- cats are ugly  then the best course is to map each of the premises into mixed inheritance rela-tionships, then interpret each mixed inheritance relationship as a weighted sum of an extensional inheritance relationship and an intensional inheritance relationship. Inference may then be done to determine the truth-values of 

Probabilistic Logic Networks 262   IntensionalInheritance cat ugly  and  ExtensionalInheritance cat ugly  and these may be combined to get the truth-value of  Inheritance cat ugly  There is significant arbitrariness here in the determination of the weighting fac-tor. It may be set arbitrarily as a system parameter, or else it may be determined “inferentially” via analogy to cases where the extensional and intensional inheri-tance values are known. For instance, if it is known that  ExtensionalInheritance dog ugly <.41,.3> IntensionalInheritance dog ugly <.38,.5> ExtensionalInheritance hog ugly <.79,.2> IntensionalInheritance hog ugly <.82,.6>  then this may be taken as evidence that for cats as well,   ExtensionalInheritance cat ugly   should get a lower weighting than  IntensionalInheritance cat ugly   In all, then, intensional inference in PLN emerges as a different way of organ-izing the same basic probabilistic information that is used in extensional inference. The intension vs. extension distinction is important in terms of philosophy and cognitive science, yet in terms of the mathematics of probabilistic inference is merely a minor variation in the utilization of the familiar extensional inference rules. 
12.7  Doing Inference on Inheritance Relationships So far in our discussion of intension we have considered only strength values, and have not looked at weight of evidence or indefinite probabilities at all. Now we remedy this omission and explore how the indefinite probabilities framework may be extended to handle intensional inference. As usual in PLN, the tricky part is getting the semantics right; the mathematics follows fairly directly from that. 

263  Chapter 12: Intensional Inference Consider the link  IntensionalInheritance whale fish  Suppose we want to assign an indefinite probability to this link (via direct evalua-tion rather than inference, initially): what’s the semantics? Crudely, the semantics is  P( x in PROP(fish) | x in PROP(whale) )  where PROP(A) may be defined as ASSOC(A) or PAT(A), depending on which variant one is using. One way to conceive of PROP(A), in either case, is as a fuzzy set to which B belongs to a degree determined by a specific formula such as  !A(B) = floor[(P(A | B) – P(A | ~B) ) (1 - |A| / |B|) ]  in the case PROP=PAT. If conditional probabilities such as P(A|B) are characterized by second-order probability distributions (as in the indefinite probabilities approach), then as a consequence !A(B) will be characterized as a second-order probability distribution over the space of fuzzy set membership values. For instance, suppose we choose a specific joint distribution for ( P(A|B), P(A|~B) ); then this will give rise to a spe-cific distribution for !A(B). Choosing various joint distributions for  ( P(A|B), P(A|~B) ), according to a second-order probability distribution specified for these conditional probabilities, one gets various distributions for !A(B); so one can then derive an envelope of distributions for !A(B). (Of course, we can choose these joint distributions using an independence assumptions if we want to; e.g., if we lack the information to do otherwise.) What this means is that the fuzzy mem-bership value !A(B) is not a single value, but is rather an envelope of distributions describing a value, which may be summarized in many ways; for example, as an indefinite probability. What we need to know to evaluate the truth-value of the above IntensionalIn-heritance relationship, then, is: Given the knowledge that X is a property of whale in the above sense, what’s the chance that X is also a property of fish? Obviously this can be quantified in a number of ways. One appealing way involves the choice function  fA(B) = [ E(!A(B)) * woe(!A(B))]  where E(!A(B)) tells you the expected value of the envelope of distributions cor-responding to E(!A (B)), and woe(!A (B)) tells you the weight of evidence calcu-lated from this envelope of distributions (either approximated as the b-level confi-dence interval width of the set of means of distributions in the envelope for some 

Probabilistic Logic Networks 264  fixed b, or else calculated more elaborately using assumptions or knowledge about the underlying distributions).  To calculate the truth-value of the above link, then, we can repeatedly carry out the following series of steps:  1. Choose a property R of whale with a probability proportional to fR(whale), where f is the default choice function specified above. 2. Estimate E(!R(fish) ).  Doing this repeatedly gives us a distribution of means, which we can summarize using an indefinite probability. All this specifies how to define the indefinite prob-ability governing the degree to which whale inherits from fish according to direct evaluation. If for some reason we want the whole envelope of distributions corre-sponding to !R(fish), then we simply have to retain this envelope in Step 2 above. To calculate IntensionalSimilarity, on the other hand, one may use a minor variation on the above methodology. Continuing with the whale/fish case, for ex-ample, one can repeatedly carry out the following series of steps:  1. Choose a random pair (R, Z), where Z is either whale or fish and R is a property of one of them, and the probability of choosing the pair is pro-portional to fR(Z), where f is the default choice function specified above. 2. Estimate E(!R(W) ), where W is either whale or fish and is different from Z.  Doing this repeatedly gives us a distribution of means, which we can summarize using an indefinite probability. 

265 
