Chapter 10: Higher-Order Extensional Inference Abstract   In this chapter we significantly extend the scope of PLN by explain-ing how it applies to what we call “higher-order inference” (HOI) – by which we mean, essentially, inference using variables and/or using relationships among rela-tionships. One aspect of HOI is inference using quantifiers, which is deferred to the following chapter because in the PLN approach it involves its own distinct set of ideas. 
10.1 Introduction The term “higher-order” is somewhat overloaded in mathematics and computer science; the sense in which we use it here is similar to how the term is used in NARS and in functional programming, but different from how it is traditionally used in predicate logic. In the theory of functional programming, a “higher order function” refers to a mathematical function whose arguments are themselves func-tions. Our use of the term here is in this spirit. PLN-HOI involves a diverse as-semblage of phenomena, but the essential thing that distinguishes HOI from FOI is a focus on relationships between relationships rather than relationships between simple terms. As an example of relationships between relationships, much of PLN-HOI deals with relationships between logical predicates, where the latter may be most simply understood as functions that take variables as arguments (though there is also an alternative interpretation of predicates using combinatory logic, in which predicates are higher-order functions and there are no variables. Here we will generally adopt the variable-based approach, though the concepts presented also apply in the combinatory-based approach). Logical relationships between predicates (variable-bearing or no) are then an example of relationships among relationships. In the context of PLN-HOI, the boundary between term logic and predicate logic becomes somewhat blurry and the approach taken is best described as an amalgam. Logical predicates are used centrally and extensively, which is obvi-ously reminiscent of predicate logic. On the other hand, the basic term logic infer-ence rules (such as Aristotelian deduction) also play a central role and are ex-tended to handle Implication relationships between predicates rather than Inheritance relationships between simple terms. This synthetic approach has been arrived at primarily for practical reasons; sticking with pure predicate or term logic (or pure combinatory logic, or any other available “pure” approach) ap-peared to introduce unnatural complexity into some intuitively simple inferences. 

Probabilistic Logic Networks  202 In the present approach, inferences that appear intuitively simple tend to come out formally simple (which is one of the qualitative design guidelines underlying PLN as a whole).  PLN-HOI, like PLN-FOI but more so, is a set of special cases. There are many HOI inference rules. However, there are not as many new truth-value formulas as in FOI, though there are some. The PLN approach is to reduce higher-order infer-ences to first-order inferences wherever possible, via mapping predicates into their SatisfyingSets. This allows the theory of probabilistic first-order inference to natu-rally play the role of a theory of probabilistic higher-order inference as well. We will begin here by giving some basic PLN rules for dealing with relation-ships between predicates and between first-order relationships. Then as the chap-ter develops we will broach more advanced topics, such as Boolean operators, variable instantiation, and combinatory logic based higher-order functions. The following chapter continues the story by extending HOI to handle universal, exis-tential, and fuzzy quantifiers. 
10.2 PLN-HOI Objects Before getting started with higher-order inference proper, we briefly review some of the knowledge representation that will be used in the HOI rules. Most of this material was presented earlier in the chapter on knowledge representation and is briefly repeated here with a slightly different slant. A Predicate, in PLN, is a special kind of term that embodies a function map-ping Atoms into truth-values. The truth-value of a predicate is similar to the term probability of an ordinary “elementary” term. It can be estimated using term prob-ability inference, or evaluated directly. When evaluated directly it is calculated by averaging the truth-value of the predicate over all arguments. In practice, this av-erage may be estimated by using all known Evaluation relationships in the reason-ing system’s memory regarding this predicate. In cases where lots of effort is available and there aren’t enough Evaluation relationships, then a random sam-pling of possible inputs can be done. All the inference rules for predicates work the same way for multi-argument predicates as for single-argument predicates. This is because a multi-argument predicate may be treated as a single-argument predicate whose argument is a list (multi-argument predicates may also be handled via currying, but discussion of this will be deferred till a later subsection). Let, for instance, (Ben, Ken) denote the list alternatively denoted  List Ben Ken Then (using the inference rule for combining Evaluation and Implication rela-tionships, to be given below) we may say things like  

203 Chapter 10: Higher-Order Extensional Inference Evaluation kiss (Ben, Ken) Implication kiss marry |- Evaluation marry (Ben, Ken) an inference that goes just the same as if the argument of kiss were an elementary term rather than a list. We will also make use of relationships involving variables along with, or in-stead of, constant terms, for instance  Evaluation do (Ben, $X)  Such relationships may be implicitly considered as predicates, and are treated symmetrically with other predicates in all PLN rules. The above example may be treated as a predicate with a single variable, represented by the notation $X. This is a predicate that evaluates, for each argument $X, the degree to which it’s true that Ben does X. Next, as well as predicates we will also make some use of objects called Sche-mata, which are terms that embody functions mapping Atoms into things other than TruthValue objects. Schemata come along with their own relationship types, Execution and ExecutionOutput (ExOut for short), which have the semantics that if a Schema F embodies a function f so that  
! fx()=y  then  ExOut f x = y Execution f x y  In short, ExOut denotes function application, whereas Execution records the out-put of a function application. We have introduced a few additional relationship types to make HOI simpler – some of these mentioned above. There is  SatisfyingSet  which relates a predicate to the set of elements that satisfy it; e.g.,  SatisfyingSet isAnUglyPerson UglyPeople  Then there’s  Quantifier 

Probabilistic Logic Networks  204  with subclasses   ForAll  ThereExists  e.g., to express   “There is some woman whom every man loves”  one can write  ThereExists $X: AND  Inheritance $X woman  ForAll $Y:   Implication    Inheritance $Y man    Evaluation loves ($Y,$X)  Finally, there’s  BooleanRelationship  with subclasses   AND, OR and NOT  which also has some other more specialized subclasses to be introduced later. We have just used AND, for instance, in the above example. The most straightforward use of the Boolean relationships is to join relationships or predicates, but there are also special variants of the Boolean relationships that exist specifically to join terms. 
10.2.1 An NL-like Notation for PLN Relationships To make the text output of our current PLN implementation easier to under-stand, we have created a simple pseudo-NL syntax for describing PLN relation-ships. While not syntactically correct English in most cases, we have found this syntax generally much easier to read than formal notation. This notation will be used in some of the following examples. The following table illustrates the NL-like syntax (which we will use in examples for the remainder of this section): 

205 Chapter 10: Higher-Order Extensional Inference  Formal representation NL-like representation Inheritance    Concept mushroom    Concept fungus 
Mushroom is fungus 
Implication    Predicate isMushroom   Predicate isFungus 
If isMushroom then isFungus 
ListRelationship   Concept yeast   Concept mushroom   Concept mold 
(yeast, mushroom, mold) 
Evaluation    Predicate friendOf   List     Concept kenji     Concept lucio   
FriendOf(kenji,lucio) 
And   Concept yeast   Concept mushroom   Concept mold 
And(yeast, mushroom, mold) 
Not   Concept yeast Not yeast 
ExOut   Schema friendOf   Concept lucio 
The result of applying friendOf to lucio 

Probabilistic Logic Networks  206 10.3 Where HOI parallels FOI The simplest kind of HOI is the kind that exactly mirrors FOI, the only differ-ence being a substitution of predicates for simple terms and a substitution of higher-order relationship types for their corresponding first-order relationship types. An example of this kind of inference is the following deduction involving the predicates is_Brazilian and eats_rump_roast:  Implication is_Brazilian is_ugly Implication is_ugly eats_rump_roast |- Implication is_Brazilan eats_rump_roast  Similar things may be done with Equivalence relationships. This kind of HOI follows the FOI rules, where Implication behaves like Inheritance, Equivalence behaves like Similarity, and so forth. Further examples will be omitted here due to their obviousness, but many examples of such inference will occur in the sample inference trajectories given in Chapter 14 when we discuss application of the cur-rent PLN implementation to making a virtual agent learn to play fetch,. 
10.4 Statements as Arguments Next we discuss a case that lies at the border between first-order and higher-order inference. Some commonsense relationships, such as “know” and “say,” take statements as arguments. Some commonsense concepts, such as “fact” and “sentence,” take statements as instances. Because the embedded statements in these examples are treated just like ordinary terms, the PLN FOI rules treat them as other terms, though from a semantic point of view the inference is higher-order.  For example, “Ben believes that the Earth is flat” can be represented as   Evaluation  believe  ( Ben ,  (Inheritance Earth flat_thing))   “The Earth is flat is a ridiculous idea” then becomes  Inheritance <tv1> Inheritance Earth flat_thing ridiculous_idea   By induction, from this statement and Ben’s belief in the flatness of the Earth, 

207 Chapter 10: Higher-Order Extensional Inference one may conclude  Inheritance <tv2> SatisfyingSet (believe_curry Ben)  ridiculous_idea   and thus  Evaluation <tv3> believe_curry Ben ridiculous_idea  which becomes   believe Ben ridiculous_idea <tv3>  i.e., “Ben believes in ridiculous ideas.” 
10.5 Combining Evaluations and Implications Combining an Evaluation and an Implication yields an Evaluation, as in the ex-ample  Evaluation is_American Ben <tv1> Implication is_American is_idiot <tv2> |- Evaluation is_idiot Ben <tv3>  The truth-value strength here is obtained via deduction, for reasons to be eluci-dated below. For simple truth values, the weight of evidence is a discounted ver-sion of the value obtained via deduction, where the discount (which we’ll call a “multiplier”) is the product of the M2ICountMultiplier and the I2MCountMultiplier. In the case of indefinite truth values, we replace the count multiplier with I2MIntervalWidthMultiplier and M2IIntervalWidthMultiplier. These width multipliers keep the means of the truth values constant while simply increasing the interval widths to account for losses in confidence. This is a “heuristic” form of inference whose correctness is not guaranteed by probability theory, due to the use of the I2M and M2I heuristic inference rules. These rules are approximatively valid for “cohesive concepts” whose members share a lot of properties; they’re badly invalid for random concepts.  We now run through the detailed logic of this inference rule, using the above il-lustrative example. First, by the definition of SatisfyingSet, we have:  

Probabilistic Logic Networks  208 Evaluation is_American Ben <tv1> Execution SatisfyingSet is_American  Americans <1> |- Member Ben Americans <tv1>  (where “Americans” is the set of all Americans). We may also define the Satisfy-ingSet of is_idiot:  Execution SatisfyingSet is_idiot idiots <1>  By the M2I (MemberToInheritance) heuristic we have  Member Ben Americans <tv1> |-  Inheritance {Ben} Americans <tv2>  where tv2 has the same strength as tv1 but, depending on truth-value type, a dis-counted count or wider interval.  By deduction we then have  Inheritance {Ben} Americans <tv2> Inheritance Americans idiots <tv3> |- Inheritance {Ben} idiots <tv4>  The I2M heuristic then yields  Inheritance {Ben} idiots <tv4> |- Member Ben idiots <tv5>  where tv5 has the same strength as tv4 but a discounted count (i.e. a wider inter-val). From the definition of SatisfyingSet we then have  Evaluation is_idiot Ben <tv5> 
10.6 Inference on Boolean Combinations Extensional Boolean operators may be defined on predicates in a straightfor-ward way. For instance, if P and Q are Boolean predicates, then the degree to which (P AND Q) is true of a set S may be defined as the percentage of members x of S for which both P(x) and Q(x) are true. If P and Q are non-crisp predicates, then the degree to which (P AND Q)(x) is true may be defined in terms of fuzzy 

209 Chapter 10: Higher-Order Extensional Inference intersection, and the degree to which (P AND Q)(S) is true may be defined as the truth-value of the fuzzy intersection (P AND Q) evaluated over the set S. Extending these notions to terms is also straightforward, because a Concept term A may be considered in terms of a predicate whose SatisfyingSet is A. In this way, Boolean operators on terms may be defined by means of Boolean operators on predicates. This is equivalent to the more direct approach of defining Boolean operation on Concept terms as set operations – according to which, e.g., the inter-section of two Concept terms A and B is the Concept whose member-set is the in-tersection of the member-sets of A and B. 
10.6.1 Inference on Boolean Compounds of Predicates First we give some heuristic rules for dealing with Boolean operators. These rules are generally bad approximations, so they are to be applied only when time is short or when there is no data to do direct evaluation. We illustrate them with simple examples:   Inference Rule Truth-value Strength Formula is_Ugly AND is_Male is_Ugly  |- isMale 
isMale.tv.s =  (isMale & isUgly).tv.s / isUgly.tv.s  is_Ugly OR is_Male is_Ugly |- is_Male 
isMale.tv.s = (MU-U)/(1-U) MU = (isMale OR isUgly).tv.s U = isUgly.tv.s  isMale isUgly |- isMale AND isUgly 
(isMale & isUgly).tv.s = isMale.tv.s *  isUgly.tv.s  isMale is Ugly |- isMale OR isUgly 
(isMale & isUgly).tv.s = isMale.tv.s + isUgly.tv.s - is-Male.tv.s *  isUgly.tv.s  isMale |- NOT isMale  (NOT isMale).tv.s = 1- isMale.tv.s   

Probabilistic Logic Networks  210 The subtle point about these rules is that a complex Boolean expression can be evaluated by applying these simple rules in many possible orders. Each order of evaluation allows the usage of different knowledge in memory. For instance, if we have  is_Male AND is_Ugly AND is_Stupid and the memory contains information about  is_Male AND is_Ugly and  is_Ugly AND is_Stupid then the inference controller must choose whether to do the evaluation as  (is_Male AND is_Ugly) AND is_Stupid or as  is_Male AND (is_Ugly AND is_Stupid) Or, the system can do the evaluation both ways and then use revision to merge the results! Optimizing the evaluation order for large expressions is a hard prob-lem. The approach taken in the current implementation is to use all evaluation or-ders for which the memory contains reasonably confident data, and then revise the results. 
10.6.2  Boolean Logic Transformations Next, there are logical transformation rules, which are given in ordinary Boo-lean logic notation as:  
! P"Q()#¬P$Q( ) 
! P"Q()#¬P$¬Q( )  
! P"Q()"P#Q()$Q#P()( ) !and which may be executed in PLN without change of truth-value.  For example,  

211 Chapter 10: Higher-Order Extensional Inference isMale OR isUgly <s,w> may be transformed into  Implication <s,w>  ExOut NOT isMale  isUgly or else  Implication <s,w>  P  isUgly where P is the predicate whose internal function is “NOT isMale”; or else, with variables,  Implication <s,w>   Evaluation (ExOut NOT isMale) X  Evaluation isUgly X 
10.6.2.1  Boolean Operators for Combining Terms As already noted, the simple Boolean operators discussed above, though pre-sented in the context of combining predicates, may also be used to combine ele-mentary terms, according to the strategy of considering a term as the SatisfyingSet of a predicate and then combining the terms via combining these predicates. Or, equivalently, one may introduce separate operators for acting on terms, defined, e.g., by  extensional intersection: (A ANDExt B)   Equivalence   Member x (A ANDExt B)  (Member x A) AND (Member x B)  extensional difference: (A MINUSExtB)  Equivalence  Member x (A MINUSExt B)  (Member x A) AND NOT (Member x B)   

Probabilistic Logic Networks  212 extensional union: (A ORExtB)  Equivalence  Member x (A ORExt B)  (Member x A) OR (Member x B)  A number of conclusions immediately follow from these definitions; e.g.,  Equivalence   Subset x (A ANDExt B)  (Subset x A) AND (Subset x B)  Implication  (Subset x A) OR (Subset x B)  Subset (A ANDExt B) x  To understand the importance of the latter implication, consider a simple ex-ample. Assume there is a term for “Bank” and a term for “American Company,” and we want to make a new term that includes the common instances of the two (so intuitively what we get is “American Bank”). Obviously, the extension of the new term should be built by the intersection of the extensions of “Bank” and “American Company” as arguments, because a term is an instance of “American Bank” if and only if it is a “Bank” and it is an “American Company.” This is what the extensional intersection does. On the other hand, as the common subset of “Bank” and “American Com-pany,” the supersets of “American Bank” include both the supersets of “Bank” and those of “American Company,” so the intension of the new term should be the union of the intensions of “Bank” and “American Company.” For example, “American Bank” is a kind of “Financial Institution” (because “Bank” is a kind of “Financial Institution”), though “American Company” is not a kind of “Financial Institution.” If we use the intersection (or union) operator for both the extension and intension we can still get a term, but it has no natural interpretation in terms of its components. Fortunately, elementary set theory behaves in the appropriate way and we have the implication given above, which says that the extensional intersec-tion belongs to categories defined as the disjunction of the sets of categories to which its components belong. Regarding extensional difference, note that  Equivalence  Subset x (A MINUSAsymExt B)   (Subset x A) AND NOT (Subset x B)  Equivalence  Subset (A MINUSAsymExt B) x Subset A x  

213 Chapter 10: Higher-Order Extensional Inference  The asymmetric extensional difference A MINUSExt B contains things that are in the extension of A but not in the extension of B. Whether these things will belong to the same categories as B or not, we can’t say, which is why there is no Subset B x term in the second implication given above. Regarding union, we have:  Equivalence  Subset x (A ORAsymExt B)  (Subset x A) OR (Subset x B)  Equivalence  (Subset A x) OR (Subset B x)  Subset (A ORAsymExt B) x  These term logical operators may be used inside an inference system in two different ways. They may be used as operators inside larger implications, or they may be used as heuristics for “seeding” the creation of new concepts. For instance, given the existence of the concepts of American Company and Bank, implications of the form  Implication  American_Company ANDAsymMix Bank  Y  may be learned. Or, a new concept C may be formed, initially defined as  American_Company ANDAsymMix Bank  but given the possibility of “drifting” over time via forming new relationships, gaining new members, etc. Both strategies have their value. 
10.7 Variable Instantiation As we’ve noted, variables are not necessary to PLN, in the sense that PLN-HOI also works with combinatory logic operators, which avoid the need for variables via use of higher-order functions. We will discuss this approach in Section 10.9 and elsewhere below. However, in our practical implementation of PLN we have found variables quite useful, and so we have used them in several of the previous subsections of this chapter on HOI, and will continue to use them in later sections and chapters; and we will now describe some rules specifically oriented toward manipulating variables. 

Probabilistic Logic Networks  214 Variable instantiation refers to the inference step wherein one takes a relation-ship involving variables and then inserts specific values for one of the variables. Of course, instantiating multiple variable values in a relationship can be handled by repeated single-variable instantiations. A useful truth-value function for vari-able instantiation can be derived as a consequence of several truth-value functions previously derived. In general, suppose we have  F($X) <tv> where $X is a variable, and we instantiate this to  F(A) <tv1> The most direct way to do this is to observe that  s1 = P( F($X) | $X = A) The most accurate and conceptually coherent method for estimating this condi-tional probability is to include both direct and indirect evidence. We can accom-plish this by interpreting  s1 = P( F($X) | Similarity $X A) so that we have  Implication  AND   Evaluation F $X   Similarity A $X  Evaluation F A  To turn this interpretation into a concrete formula, it suffices to break down the proposed inference step into a series of substeps that are equivalent to previously discussed inference rules. What we need is to find a truth-value for the conclusion of the inference:  Similarity A B Evaluation F B |- Evaluation A B  But this inference can be transformed, via two applications of the M2I inference rule, into  

215 Chapter 10: Higher-Order Extensional Inference Similarity A B Inheritance B (SatisfyingSet F) |- Inheritance A (SatisfyingSet F)  which can be transformed into the following via the sim2inh rule:  Inheritance A B Inheritance B (SatisfyingSet F) |- Inheritance A (SatisfyingSet F)  And now we have arrived at an ordinary deductive inference.  So according to this line of reasoning, the truth-value of the variable-instantiation inference conclusion should be:  F(A).tv = I2M ( deduction( M2I(F.tv),     sim2inh( (Similarity A $X).tv) ) Note that in the above derivation, the assumption is made that the SatisfyingSet of F is a “cohesive” set; i.e., that the elements within it tend to be fairly similar to each other. Without this assumption this approach doesn’t work well, and there’s no way to say anything about F(A) with a reasonably high confidence. PLN auto-matically accounts for this lack of confidence via the count or interval width multipliers in the M2I/I2M rule, which depend on how cohesive the set involved is. More cohesive sets involve smaller multipliers. The right multiplier for each set may be computed empirically if elements of the set are known, or else it may be computed by inference via the assumption that similar sets will tend to have simi-lar cohesions and therefore similar interval width multipliers. As a particular example of the above inference rule, consider the following two inferences, expressed in pseudo-NL notation:  1)  If isDead($X) then there exists $Y so that  killed($Y,$X) <[0.1, 0.3], 0.9, 10> |- If isDead(Osama) then there exists $Y so that  killed($Y,Osama) tv1  2)  If isDead($X) & isTerrorist($X), then there exists $Y  so that killed($Y,$X) <[0.5, 0.7] , 0.9, 10> 

Probabilistic Logic Networks  216 |- If isDead(Osama) & isTerrorist(Osama), then there  exists $Y so that killed($Y,Osama) tv2  These inferences include quantifiers, which won’t be discussed until the fol-lowing chapter, but that’s not the main point we need to consider here. Assuming  [ Similarity $X Osama ].tv = <[0,15, 0.25], 0.95, 10> and assuming M2I/I2M interval width multipliers of 1.5 for both inferences, then we obtain  tv1 = <[0.123024, 0.486104], 0.9, 10> tv2 = <[0.235028, 0.570565], 0.9, 10>  On the other hand, if we use the fact that the premise of the second inference involves a more cohesive set than the premise of the first inference, then that means that the second inference involves a lesser M2I/I2M interval width multi-plier than the first one. In fact the set of $X who are dead terrorists is much smaller and much more cohesive than the set of $X who are dead entities. For dead terrorists (inference 2) we may plausibly assume an M2I/I2M interval width multiplier of 1.2. In this case we obtain the revised value  tv2 = <[0.259443, 0.574509], 0.9, 10> 
10.7.1 Implications Between Non-Variable-Bearing Relationships Now we present an interesting, somewhat conceptually subtle application of the variable-instantiation formula. We show that it is possible to construct higher-order relationships such as implications that relate simple relationships without variables – and without any higher-order functions being involved. The semantics of these relationships, however, is subtle and involves “possible worlds.” The truth-values of these relationships can be derived via a combination of the possi-ble-worlds interpretation with the variable-instantiation truth-value formula given above. For simplicity, we will discuss this formula in the context of simple truth-values, but extrapolation to indefinite truth-values is not difficult. As an example, consider  Implication   Ben is ugly  Ben eats beef  How can we define the truth-value of this?  

217 Chapter 10: Higher-Order Extensional Inference First, we suggest, the most useful way to interpret the expression is:  Implication   In possible universe C, Ben is ugly   In possible universe C, Ben eats beef   Note that this reinterpretation has a variable – the possible universe C – and hence is interpretable as a standard Implication relationship. But we may interpret, e.g.,  In possible universe C, Ben is ugly  as meaning  Inheritance (Ben AND “possible universe C ”) ugly  In other words, one may view Ben as a multiple-universe-spanning entity, and look at the intersections of Ben with the possible universes in the multiverse. Suppose then that we know  Implication   Inheritance $X ugly  Inheritance $X beef_eater  Variable instantiation lets us derive from this  Implication   Inheritance (Ben AND “possible universe C ”) ugly Inheritance (Ben AND “possible universe C”)  beef_eater  which is equivalent by definition to  Implication   Inheritance Ben ugly  Inheritance Ben beef_eater  So, in short, we may quantify inheritance between non-variable-bearing relation-ships using the variable instantiation formula. 
10.8 Execution Output Relationships As noted above, if we have a function that outputs an Atom, then we use an ExecutionOutput (ExOut for short) relationship to refer to the Atom that’s output, 

Probabilistic Logic Networks  218 and an Execution relationship to denote the ternary relationship between schema, input, and output. Here we describe a few basic rules for manipulating ExOut and Execution relationships. First, note that we have the tautology  Execution $S $X (ExOut $S $X) <1,1> For example, if we want to say “The agent of a killing situation is usually Ar-menian” then we may say  Implication  Inheritance $x killing  Inheritance   ExOut Agent $x   Armenian  which is equivalent to  Implication  Inheritance $x killing  Implication   Execution Agent $x $y   Inheritance $y Armenian  In this example, the ExOut relationship allows us to dispense with an additional relationship and an additional variable. There is a general rule  Equivalence <1,1> Evaluation F (ExOut A B) AND   Execution A B $Y <1,1>   Evaluation F $Y  that may be used to convert expressions with ExOuts into expressions without them. Finally, an alternative way of saying  ExOut Agent $X  is to construct a predicate P whose internal predicate-function evaluates “Agent $X”. Then we have  Implication  Inheritance $X killing 

219 Chapter 10: Higher-Order Extensional Inference  Inheritance   Evaluation P $X   Armenian 
10.9 Reasoning on Higher-Order Functions PLN-HOI is capable of dealing with functions or relationships of arbitrarily high order, with relationships between relationships ... between relationships, or functions of functions ... of functions. This property implies that a fully capable PLN can be created without any use of variables at all, due to the possibility of us-ing combinatory logic to represent mathematical expressions that would normally be denoted using variables, in an entirely variable-free way. In practice, it seems that the use of variables is often worthwhile because it allows more compact rep-resentation of useful higher-order relationships than would be possible without them. However, there are also many cases where curried relationships of the style common in combinatory logic and combinatory logic based programming lan-guages are useful within PLN, due to their own ability to represent certain types of relationship with particular compactness. As a simple example of a case where the curried representation is semantically natural, consider the schema “very” which maps a predicate P into the predicate “very P.” Then we might have  Implication  ExOut very $X  $X  from which we can draw the conclusion e.g.  Implication  ExOut very isMale  isMale  Note that the original statement is equivalent to  Implication  ExOut (ExOut very $X) $Y  ExOut $X $Y  Alternately, we can do the same thing with combinators rather than variables. To make this work nicely we want to use the curried version of Implication, in which, e.g.,   

Probabilistic Logic Networks  220 (Implication A B).tv := (Evaluation (ExOut Implication_curried A) B).tv  where the standard Implication relationship might also be called Implication_list, since it is in effect a predicate that takes a list argument. The above example be-comes  Evaluation ExOut Implication_curried   ExOut very $X   ExOut I $X  using the I combinator. To eliminate the variable we use the definitions  S f g x = (fx) (gx), so   B f g x = f(gx)  which lets us reason as follows, using Imp as a shorthand for Implication_curried: (Imp (very x)) (I x)  =  ((B Imp very) x) (I x) =  S (B imp very) I x   In term and relationship notation, this final result would be written  ExOut  ExOut   S   A  I  A := ExOut  ExOut   B   imp  very  Note the cost of removing the variables; we’ve introduced a few extra terms and relationships. Whether the variable-free or variable-bearing form is better de-pends on the kind of reasoning you’re doing. Removing variables allows one to use simpler inference control strategies, but generally increases the size of the structures being reasoned on. The variable-free, curried approach is useful only in cases where this size increase is not too severe. 

221 Chapter 10: Higher-Order Extensional Inference 10.10 Unification in PLN1 The concept of unification is an important part of theoretical computer science, and also plays a key role in AI; for example, via its central role in the Prolog lan-guage (Deransart et al 1996) and its role in computational linguistics (in unifica-tion grammars) (Roark and Sproat 2007.) This section explores the manifestation of unification in PLN, which is relatively simple but different from usual treat-ments of unification due to the lack of focus on variables and the central role played by uncertainty. To illustrate the nature of unification in PLN, let us introduce an example involving a Predicate P relating the expression values of two genes (XYZ and ABC) at different times:  P($T) := Implication  expression(XYZ,$T)>.5 AND expression(ABC,$T+1)<.5 expression(XYZ,$T)<.2  and a related Predicate Q:  Q := Implication  expression(XYZ, $T)>.9   expression(XYZ, $T)<.4  Now, it is not hard to compute the truth-value of the relationship  Implication P Q by referring to the actual underlying data points, assuming one has access to this data. But what if one wants to compute this truth-value without doing this, just by manipulating P and Q? To do this, one has to “unify” the two expressions. We may write the two expressions as  Implication L1 R1 Implication L2 R2  It is possible to find L and R, with nontrivial truth-values, so that  Implication L L1  <t1> Implication L L2  <t2>                                                              1 This section was coauthored with Guilherme Lamacie. 

Probabilistic Logic Networks  222 Implication R R1  <t3> Implication R R2  <t4>  also with nontrivial truth-values. Specifically,  L($T) := [ expression(XYZ, $T) > .9 ] R($T) := [ expression(XYZ, $T) < .2 ]  will work.  Induction then yields  Implication L1  L2  <t5>  Implication R1 R2  <t6>  which then yields  Implication <t7> Implication L1  R1 Implication L2  R2  by HOI rules. The “unification” step here is the determination of L and R; these terms “unify” the two original expressions. In this case, because of the specialized nature of the expressions, the unifying expressions are not hard to find. In general, finding uni-fying expressions is not so simple. 
10.10.1   PLN Unification versus Prolog Unification It may not be immediately clear how this process we’ve called “unification” re-lates to unification as conventionally done in mathematical logic, for instance in the Prolog programming language. A few brief comments in this regard may be valuable. We will use Prolog notation freely, and so this section may not be fully comprehensible to the reader who’s not familiar with Prolog; for necessary back-ground the reader is referred to (Spivey 1996.)  A typical Prolog unification might involve a query such as  ? son(A, sam), sister(B, becky), grandpa (A, B)  and a database consisting of   father(ted, ben) father(victor, ted) father(sam, victor)  male(X) ! father(X, Y) 

223 Chapter 10: Higher-Order Extensional Inference grandpa(X, Z) ! father(X, Y),  father(Y, Z)  sister(ben, becky) son(X, Y) ! father(Y, X), male(X)  To process this, son(A, sam) is unified with son(X, Y), with the substitution $s1 = {A/X_1, Y/sam}, yielding a third expression son(X_1,sam). This expression is then replaced with father(sam, X_1), male(X_1). The first Predicate father(sam, X_1) is unified with father(sam, victor), by substitution $s2 = {X_1/victor}. Given this substitution, the next step is to try to solve male(victor), which is done by uni-fying it with male(X), by $s3 = {X/victor} and then solving the tail Predicate fa-ther(victor, Y) (i.e., unifying it with father(victor, ted)). Now, the next Predicate in the query sister(B, becky) is unified with sister(ben, becky), by $s4 = {B/ben}. Note that substitutions $s1,$s2 and $s4 cause the last Predicate in the query to be grandpa(victor, ben). This can be now solved by unification with grandpa(X, Z), by $s5 = {X/victor, Z/ben}, and the third expression produces grandpa(victor, ben), which leads to the tail Predicates father(victor, Y), father(Y, ben), which are further solved analogously, thus yielding a proof of grandpa(Victor,Ben). In this type of unification, one compares two expressions to each other and tries to find variable values that will work in both expressions. The trick is in the order of processing of expressions; for this, Prolog uses a simple depth-first search with backtracking. PLN unification is a bit different, because there are not necessarily any vari-ables, and implication relations are probabilistic rather than crisp. However, the above example can easily be done in PLN in several ways. Here we will show how it can be done by reformulating each expression in a variable-free way. For instance  grandpa(X, Z) ! father(X, Y),  father(Y, Z)  becomes  Implication (B father father) grandpa  (since B father father x y = father (father x) y). We then have a “database” consist-ing of  Evaluation (father Ted)  Ben Evaluation (father Victor) Ted Evaluation (father Sam) Victor Implication (B father father) grandpa  Evaluation (sister Ben) Becky Implication son (C father)  What is the “query”? Well, seeing that  

Probabilistic Logic Networks  224 grandpa (a, b) = (grandpa a) b = grandpa a b  son(a, Sam) =(son a) Sam = C I Sam (son a) =       B (C I Sam) son a  sister(b, Becky) = B (C I Becky) sister b   the query is then just a search for terms a, b so that  a ! SatisfyingSet (B (C I Sam) son ) b ! SatisfyingSet (B (C I Becky) sister) b ! SatisfyingSet ( grandpa a)  To put this more elegantly, we can introduce an argument list (a,b) and then define  listify grandpa (a, b) = grandpa a b  We are then looking for an element of  SatisfyingSet( listify grandpa ) "  SatisfyingSet( (B (C I Sam) son, B (C I  Becky) sister) )  i.e., for an element that makes the Predicate   AND  listify grandpa ( (B (C I Sam) son, B (C I Becky) sister)  output the value True. Instead of doing classical variable unification, what happens to find an element of the SatisfyingSet of this Predicate function? First, the “sister” term in the term B (C I Becky) sister is matched with the “sister” term in the known fact    Evaluation (sister Ben) Becky  So Ben is tried out as an argument of B (C I Becky) sister and is indeed found to cause this term to evaluate to True. Then, “son” is found not to match to anything concrete, but is found in the formula   Implication son (C father)  This formula is then used to create information such as  Evaluation (son Ben) Ted Evaluation (son Ted) Victor 

225 Chapter 10: Higher-Order Extensional Inference Evaluation (son Victor) Sam  The last of these then matches the term B (C I Sam) son. On the other hand, there is no concrete match for grandpa in the given knowl-edge base, but there is a rule grandpa = B father father, which matches directly with the knowledge   Evaluation (father Ted) Ben  Evaluation (father Victor) Ted  Evaluation (father Sam) Victor  In this way the system is eventually led to discover that the pair  (Ben, Victor)  lies in the appropriate SatisfyingSet. This example illustrates the general principle that, in a variable-free context, logical unification comes down to finding elements in SatisfyingSets that are de-fined by intersections of the SatisfyingSets corresponding to Predicates of interest. The chief difference between this example and the earlier example involving gene expression relationships is absence of probabilistic truth-value in the present example. In Prolog-like unification, two terms either match or they don’t – i.e., an item is either a member of a given SatisfyingSet or it’s not. In general PLN unifi-cation, this is not the case; there can of course be degrees of membership, which makes the unification process yet more computationally difficult. 
10.10.2   General Unification The general problem of unification, in a PLN context, is as follows. Given two Predicates R and S, one wants to find a Predicate T so that SatisfyingSet(T)=SatisfyingSet(R)!SatisfyingSet(S) and SatisfyingSet(T) is as large as possible.  Of course, one can nominally solve the problem by simply forming the Predi-cate  T = R AND S But of course in doing this one has no real idea of the truth-value of R AND S, un-less one makes a possibly fallacious independence assumption. In some cases, af-ter all, R and S may contradict each other, so that SatisfyingSet(T) is empty. The problem of unification, then, is basically the problem of making a dependence-

Probabilistic Logic Networks  226 savvy estimate of the truth-value of the compound R AND S. In practice, rather than evaluating T = R AND S explicitly, one may seek T so that Implication T (R AND S)  <t> with t<1, but with the property that the truth-value of T can be relatively readily assessed based on the system’s knowledge. There is no known generally effective algorithm for solving this problem. There are only more or less plausible heuristics. For instance, suppose that R and S are both conjunctive compounds of the form  R = R1 AND … AND Rn S = S1 AND … AND Sn  Then one can seek to unify each Ri with some Sj . Of course, this is not all that easy. First of all there are n2 pairings to look at. And for each one of these pairings one is stuck with a smaller, but possibly still difficult, unification problem.  Here the terms Ri and Sj are effectively serving as the analogue of “variables” in Prolog-style unification. There are two profound difficulties here that are not seen in Prolog, however. First, there is no normal form for logical expressions here, so we don’t know which Ri should match with which Sj. Second, rather than just crisply substituting one “variable” for another, we have to evaluate probabilis-tic implications (truth-values of relationships of the form Implication T (Ri, AND Sj). The gene expression example given above is actually an easier case than the conjunctive compound case. A brief re-analysis of this example may be instructive at this point. There we had two examples of the form  Implication L1 R1 Implication L2 R2  Because these were obviously of the same format, it was reasonable to seek to unify L1 and L2, and R1 and R2 respectively. No consideration of a large number of permutations was required. Because of the particular form of the terms in this case, the intersections were not hard to find. For instance  R1 AND R2 := expression(XYZ,t)<.2  AND  expression(XYZ,t)<.4  This is an expression that can be simplified easily since   Implication R1  R2   is given, and it’s known that  

227 Chapter 10: Higher-Order Extensional Inference AND( A, B) Implication A B  |-  A  so that  R1 AND R2 = expression(XYZ,t)<.2  The case   L1 AND L2  := AND expression(XYZ, t)>.5 AND expression(ABC, t+1)<.5 expression(XYZ, t)>.9  is not so simple, however. It can immediately be simplified to  L1 AND L2  := expression(XYZ, t)>.9  AND expression(ABC, t+1)<.5  To go further from here one has to either make some wild guesses or revert to actually evaluating this predicate on real data. The same goes for the further, more speculative reduction  Implication expression(XYZ, t) > .9 L1 AND L2   In practice, then, we propose that unification problems can be approached in PLN via a combination of explicit quantitative predicate evaluation, and transfor-mation using the earlier-given predicate transformation rules. The general rule is: keep on transforming until it doesn’t work anymore, and then start evaluating – where “doesn’t work anymore” means, essentially, that a precipitous drop in con-fidence has occurred as a result of risky transformations. 
10.11 Inference on Embedded Relationships Two crucial cases of higher-order knowledge, requiring special treatment, are hypothetical and contextual knowledge. These are different cases, but closely re-lated. Each of them represents knowledge that is stored in an AI system’s mem-

Probabilistic Logic Networks  228 ory, but implicitly understood not to pertain to the universe at large in a straight-forward way. PLN can handle these kinds of knowledge easily, so long as the proper knowledge representation structures are put in place. 
10.11.1   Hypothetical Knowledge As a simple, archetypal example of hypothetical knowledge, consider the statement “Matt believes the Earth is flat.” Before presenting the way this is dealt with in PLN, we will discuss a couple of incorrect ways of presenting it to explain why we have chosen the course we have. First, the statement could facilely be rep-resented as  Evaluation believe Matt (Inheritance Earth flat) The problem with this, however, is that it involves entering a bogus piece of knowledge  Inheritance Earth flat into the system. One might try to get around this problem by judiciously inserting truth-values, such as  Evaluation <1>  believe Matt (Inheritance Earth flat <0>)  But this is not a good approach; immediately one faces difficulties. This expres-sion has two possible interpretations:  “Matt is certain that the Earth is not flat” “Matt is certain that the Earth is flat, but No-vamente believes it is not flat”  One might deal with this particular case by just accepting the second interpreta-tion. But this isn’t really a general way out, because it doesn’t give one a way to say “Matt is pretty certain that the Earth is almost surely flat.” If one tries to ren-der this latter statement as  Evaluation <.7>   believe Matt (Inheritance Earth flat <.9>)  then one is inserting the bogus knowledge (Inheritance Earth flat <.9>) into the system and there is no easy workaround. 

229 Chapter 10: Higher-Order Extensional Inference The solution we have taken in PLN is to explicitly introduce a representation of “hypotheticalness” into the picture. We do this with the Hypothetical Atom, a unary relationship which has the informal semantics that  Hypothetical A  means “don’t assume A is true, just assume ‘Hypothetical A’ is true.” The interesting thing is, it’s not necessary to give PLN any kind of refined, ex-plicit semantics for dealing with Hypothetical (sometimes Hyp for short). Rather, Hyp is a marker. Inferences such as   Evaluation believe Matt (Hyp (Inheritance Earth flat)) Evaluation believe Matt (Hyp (Inheritance Mars Earth)) |- Evaluation believe Matt (Hyp (Inheritance Mars flat))  can be made automatically, just as if Hyp were any other relationship type. The special rule required is, quite simply, a rule stating that before drawing a conclusion  L1 L2 |- L3  it should be determined whether either L1 or L2 is hypothetical (is pointed to by a Hyp) or not. If so, then the inference is not done – though inferences of the form  P (Hyp L1) P (Hyp L2) |- P (Hyp L3)  may be done, for appropriate P, as in the preceding example. This “inference inhi-bition” rule is the full explicitly encoded semantics of Hypothetical. An interesting question is whether, for example, the entry of the relation  Matt believes ( Hyp (Inheritance unicorns cute))  into the system causes the strength of the truth-value of the unicorn Term to be in-creased. In other words, if the system finds it’s often valuable to posit hypothetical unicorns, should this increase the system’s estimate of the probability of unicorns in “its world”? One may introduce a system parameter determining the amount 

Probabilistic Logic Networks  230 that a hypothetical mention of an Atom increases the TruthValue of that Atom, but ultimately this sort of thing must be dealt with differently in different contexts, hence it requires the learning of appropriate cognitive schemata. The combination of hypothetical and nonhypothetical information may also be useful, although it must be handled with care. For instance, suppose we want to reason  Matt believes the Earth is flat Flat things are not round |-  Matt believes the Earth is not round  Properly enough, there is no way to do this directly. Rather, we need an additional premise such as  Implication A (Matt believes Hyp(A))  or  Implication   (A AND (Inheritance A C))   (Matt believes Hyp(A))  Implication (Inheritance flat NOT(round)) C  where C is some category of knowledge in which the system is fairly sure Matt believes, in spite of his eccentric beliefs in other domains. Human beings are quite adept at forming such categories C, and thus at manag-ing the overlapping but nonidentical belief systems of themselves and other hu-man beings. This is a skill that seems to be learned in middle childhood, along with other aspects of advanced inference and advanced social understanding. 
10.11.2   Higher-Order Statements and Judgments The topic of hypothetical knowledge brings to the fore another issue that has more general relevance: the difference between higher-order statements and higher-order judgments. A higher-order statement is a relationship that treats its component relationships as truth-value-free entities. A higher-order judgment is a relationship that treats its component relationships as truth-valued entities. An example of higher-order judgment is:  Evaluation believe Matt (Hyp (Inheritance Earth flat <.9>)) 

231 Chapter 10: Higher-Order Extensional Inference  This statement is saying that Matt believes the Earth is flat with a .9 strength.  Similarly, to say that Cassio does not believe the Earth is flat we could say, for instance,  Evaluation   believe   List   Cassio    Hypothetical     Inheritance Earth flat <.01>  The presumption here is that the TruthValue of (Inheritance Earth flat) is part of the entity being fed to the believe Term as an argument. On the other hand, what would be an example of a higher-order statement? When we say  Implication   AND   Inheritance Earth flat   Inheritance Earth planet  Inheritance planet flat  we actually don’t mean  Implication  AND   InheritanceEarth flat <t1>    Inheritance Earth planet <t2>   Inheritance planet flat <t3>  In other words, we don’t mean   The earth is flat with TruthValue t1 The earth is a planet with TruthValue t2 |- Planets are flat with TruthValue t3  where t1 , t2 , t3 are the actual truth-values of the respective statements in the system. Inference could construct statements like this, but then the truth-value t3 produced by inference from t1 and t2 might not be the actual truth-value of Inheritance planet flat in the system. In fact it generally will not be, unless this inference step is the only thing that has ever affected the truth-value of this relationship. In our above examples of hypothetical relationships, we were assuming “higher-order judgment” (HOJ) style inference – that is, we were assuming rela-

Probabilistic Logic Networks  232 tionships were being referred to with truth-values intact. On the other hand, in our reasoning about flat planets, we were assuming “higher-order statement” (HOS) style inference; that is, we were assuming relationships were being referred to without specific truth-values attached. It seems that in hypothetical inference we often do want to assume the HOJ case. Otherwise, the HOS case is the most common case but not the exclusive case.  There are, however, some cases where one might want to make non-hypothetical higher-order judgments. For instance, to represent “I am positive that countries that are rich in oil are moderately wealthy,” one might use  Implication <.99>  AND   Inheritance $X country   Inheritance $X oil_rich  Inheritance $X wealthy <.6>  Here the <.99> is for the “positive”; the <.6> is for the “moderately.” Notation-ally, one may distinguish the two cases implicitly as follows:  if a truth-value marker <t> is included in denoting an Atom that is part of another relationship, one may assume that HOJ is implied.  Implementationally, to make the distinction one needs to introduce some kind of marker to distinguish the two cases. The marker should attach to logical rela-tionships; e.g., Implication in the above example. We have chosen to make “higher-order statement” the default case, and require a special marker to denote “higher-order judgment.” Where extra notational explicitness is required we may denote this as, for instance,  Implication_HOJ <.99>  AND   Inheritance X country   Inheritance X oil_rich  Inheritance X wealthy <.6>  We have been focusing on cases involving relationships because this is the most common kind of higher-order judgment, but something similar can happen with Terms; e.g., one can say  Inheritance_HOJ  ugly <.1>  beautiful <.8>  meaning that things that are not very ugly are often very beautiful. However, this example is better said (to within a decent degree of approximation) as  

233 Chapter 10: Higher-Order Extensional Inference Inheritance  ugly  NOT beautiful  Generally speaking, in the situations we have analyzed, cases where inter-term HOJ relationships are the most convenient alternative are even rarer than similar cases with interrelationship HOJ relationships. 
10.11.3   Contextual Knowledge Hypothetical knowledge is knowledge that the reasoning system may not be-lieve at all; contextual knowledge, on the other hand, is knowledge that the system believes only in certain circumstances.  For instance, suppose we want to say “Ben is competent in the domain of mathematics; Ben is incompetent in the domain of juggling.” What we mean here is something like  Implication  Ben AND doing_mathematics  competent  Implication  Ben AND doing_juggling  NOT competent  Here we are saying that instances of Ben who are doing mathematics are compe-tent (at what they are doing), whereas instances of Ben who are doing juggling are not competent (at what they are doing).  Of course, this is only one among many possible representations of the posited conceptual relationships in terms of terms and relationships. In reality, there may be no single term for “competent” or “doing_juggling”, the given HOS’s may be represented as collections of HOJ’s, etc. We have just chosen a particularly simple possible representation for expository purposes. The case of contextual knowledge is so common that we believe it is worth-while to have a special representational mechanism just for dealing with it. For this reason we introduce Context, with the semantics  Context C (Hyp (R X Y)) := R (X ANDExt C) (Y ANDExt C)  Context C (Hyp (R X Y Z)) := R (X ANDExt C) (Y ANDExt C) (Z ANDExt C) 

Probabilistic Logic Networks  234  So for example  Context  doing_mathematics  Hyp (Inheritance Ben competent)  Context   doing_juggling   Hyp    NOT (Inheritance Ben competent)  Using the above definition of Context these translate into  Implication  Ben ANDExt doing_mathematics  competent ANDExt doing_mathematics  Implication  Ben ANDExt doing_juggling  NOT    competent ANDExt doing_juggling  which are equivalent to the forms given previously. The value of the Context “macro” is that it simplifies inferences such as  Context   doing_mathematics   Hyp (Inheritance Ben competent) Context   doing_mathematics   Hyp (Inheritance Gui competent) |- Context   doing_mathematics   Hyp (Similarity Ben Gui)  This kind of inference could be done without Context, using the explicit ANDExt-heavy representations of the premise relationships. However, the exis-tence of Context has the effect of pushing the system to make inferences of this type, whereas otherwise such inferences would be carried out only occasionally as part of the generic process of inference on Predicates. Now, an advanced AI sys-tem without Context could be expected to learn from experience that inference on Predicates of the “Context-ish” variety is useful, and create cognitive schema bias-ing the inference process toward combining Predicates of this type. However, we 

235 Chapter 10: Higher-Order Extensional Inference feel that explicitly pushing the system to combine Contexts inferentially will be a big help in getting any PLN-based reasoning system to the point where it’s able to do this kind of advanced cognitive schema creation.  
10.12 An Application of PLN-HOI to Inference Based on Natural Language Information Extraction In this section we summarize an example of PLN-HOI that was published in (Ikle and Goertzel, 2007), which was previously carried out using PLN inference rules together with alternate inference formulas acting directly on SimpleTruth-Values. The analysis given in (Ikle and Goertzel, 2007) was a modification of an earlier treatment given in (Goertzel et al 2006), which utilized heuristic weight of evidence formulas; the newer treatment utilized indefinite probabilities. What we present here is a small and partial “inference trail” that is part of a larger trail de-scribed in (Goertzel et al 2006), which was part of an experiment in integrative NLP using an integrated system that  • Parsed the sentences in PubMed abstracts using a grammar parser • Transformed the output of the grammar parser into logical relation-ships using a collection of expert rules • Performed probabilistic logical inference on these logical relationships using PLN  The system, called Bioliterate, was created under a contract from the NIH Clinical Center and was specifically tuned to infer relationships between genes, proteins and malignancies. The overall inference of which this example is a part is depicted qualitatively in the following table, which shows the premises in the form of the actual sentences present in PubMed automatically extracted and used as premises.  Premise 1 Importantly, bone loss was almost completely prevented by p38 MAPK inhibition. Premise 2 Thus, our results identify DLC as a novel inhibitor of the p38 pathway and provide a molecular mechanism by which cAMP suppresses p38 acti-vation and promotes apoptosis.  Conclusion DLC prevents bone loss.  cAMP prevents bone loss.  The premises depicted in this table were automatically converted into sets of 

Probabilistic Logic Networks  236 logical relationships using a set of hand-coded expert rules embodying linguistic knowledge, and PLN was used to draw the conclusion via forward chaining infer-ence. The following table depicts a fragment of the overall inference trail, which basically gathers together a number of mutually relevant relationships within a single conjunction.   Rule Premises  Conclusion  Inh inhib1, inhib  <[.95, 1], .9> Abduction Inh inhib2, inhib  <[.95, 1], .9>  Inh inhib1, inhib2 <[0, 0.221708], .9> Similarity Eval subj (prev1, inhib1) <[.95, 1], .9> 
Substitution Inh inhib1, inhib2  Eval subj (prev1, inhib2) <[.05, .44], .9> 
 Inh inhib2, inhib Deduction Inh inhib, causal_event <[.95, 1], .9>  Inh inhib2, causal_event <[.856, .998], .9>  Inh inhib2, causal_event   Inh prev1, causal_event <[.854, .998], .9>   Eval subj (prev1, inhib2)  AND Eval subj (inhib2, DLC) <[.95, 1], .9>   AND  <[0.0625, 0.358972], 0.9>       Inh inhib2, causal_event       Inh prev2, causal_event 

237 Chapter 10: Higher-Order Extensional Inference      Eval subj <prev2, inhib2>       Eval subj <inhib2, DLC>   In the overall inference trail this conjunction is then used as a premise to a sub-sequent inference step, which uses unification to conclude that Eval subj (prev1, in-hib2); i.e., that the prevention mentioned in Premise 1 is the subject of the inhibi-tion mentioned in Premise 2. We next use reverse truth-value conversion to convert the full <[L, U], b, k> truth-values into <s, n, b> triples for all of our premises, as well as for our conclusion. The truth-value conversion results are shown in the table:  Premise     <[L,U],b>     <s,n,b> Inh inhib1 inhib     <[0.95, 1], 0.9>     <.988, 28, .9> inhib1 <[0.95, 1], 0.9>     <.988, 28, .9> inhib <[0, 0.168], 0.8>     <.083, 8, .8> inhib2 <[0, 0.032], 0.8>     <.016, 15, .8> Conclusion   AND     <[0.06, 0.4], .9>     <.214, 6, .9>  The heuristic approach reported previously produced a truth-value of <1, 0.07> for the final conjunction. The indefinite probabilities approach produced a truth-value of <[0.0625, 0.358972], 0.9)> , or <.2143, 6> in <s,n> form, and <.2143, .358> in <s,w> form. These two results are not logically contradictory at all, but the indefinite probabilities result is more informative. The prior heuristic formulas told us that there is very little evidence supporting the contention that the strength of the conclusion is near 1. The indefinite probabilities formulas tell us (more use-fully) that there is a reasonable though not overwhelming amount of evidence that the strength of the conclusion is near .21. Being more principled, the indefinite probabilities method is guaranteed, if the underlying distributional assumptions are realistic, to focus on the most interesting part of the conclusion truth-value dis-tribution. 

Probabilistic Logic Networks  238  

239 
