Chapter 13: Aspects of Inference Control 
Abstract   In this chapter we will describe a few important aspects of the mathe-matical and software structures via which PLN has been implemented within the Novamente Cognition Engine – an implementation that has been structured with the goal of allowing PLN to serve the broadest possible variety of functions within an integrative AI context. 
13.1  Introduction The focus of this book is PLN mathematics, not software engineering, cogni-tive science, or integrative AI. However, the purpose with which the PLN mathe-matics has been conceived is closely tied to these other two topics; we have sought to create an uncertain inference framework capable of serving as a pragmatic un-certain inference component within the integrative Novamente AI system. For simplicity we will avoid giving any details of the Novamente architecture, present-ing only the PLN implementation architecture itself. The mathematical, software, and conceptual relationships between PLN and the remainder of the NCE are be-yond the scope of this book. 
13.2  Forward- and Backward-Chaining Inference The PLN inference rules and formulas are local in character; they tell you how to produce a conclusion from a particular set of premises. They don’t address what is in a sense the most difficult aspect of inference: the determination of which in-ference rules to perform in what order. We call this process “inference control.” Inference control in PLN is handled via mechanisms that are familiar from tradi-tional AI – forward and backward chaining – but with special twists enforced by the omnipresence of uncertainty in PLN inference.  Generically, in PLN or elsewhere, backward chaining is defined as an inference process that starts with one or more inference targets and works backward to find inference paths leading to these targets as conclusions. An inference engine using backward chaining starts by searching the available inference rules until it finds 

Probabilistic Logic Networks 266 one that has a conclusion of a form that matches a desired goal. It then seeks to find suitable premises for the rule – premises that will cause the rule to output the goal as a conclusion. In conventional, crisp-logic Boolean backward chaining, if appropriate premises for that inference rule are not known to be true, then they are added to the list of goals, and the process continues until a path is found in which all goals on the path have been achieved. In PLN backward chaining, the probabil-istic truth-values necessitate that the appropriate premises for that inference rule are recorded as such but also added to the list of goals. The process continues until the target atom can be produced with truth-value weight higher than a threshold set by the controller. The trick of making this work effectively is “pruning”: intel-ligently and adaptively choosing which rules to choose and which premises to feed them, iteratively as the process proceeds. Generic forward chaining, on the other hand, starts with the available knowled-ge and uses inference rules to derive a series of conclusions. An inference engine using forward chaining searches the inference rules until it finds one whose inputs have the same form as the given premises, then uses the rules to produce output. The output is then added to the set of possible premises to be used in future infe-rence steps. The tricky part here is once again pruning; in most cases there are many different rules from which to select, and it’s not clear which are the right ones. The bugaboo of both forward- and backward-chaining inference control is combinatorial explosion. We describe here some heuristics used to palliate this problem in PLN, but these heuristics do not solve the problem fully adequately, except for the case of fairly simple inferences. Of course, the problem of com-binatorial explosion is not fully solvable without introducing implausibly massive computational resources, but it must be solved more thoroughly than is done here if PLN is to be useful for powerful general intelligence. In the overall Novamente architecture, the combinatorial explosion is intended to be quelled via the integra-tion of PLN with other AI components such as evolutionary learning, stochastic pattern mining and adaptive attention allocation, topics that will not be discussed here.  
13.3 Differences Between Crisp and Probabilistic Theorem-Proving While the basic structures of PLN inference control (forward and backward chaining) are familiar from crisp-logic-based theorem-proving, significant diffe-rences arise due to the prominent role that uncertainty plays in PLN inference. In the automated proof of crisp logical theorems, the goal is to build an inference trail that proceeds, in each step, from premise predicates with crisp truth-values to new predicates with crisp truth-values. The goal in backward chaining, for exam-

267  Chapter 13: Aspects of Inference Control ple, is to find a single path of this nature leading from some set of known premises to the given target predicate. In probabilistic theorem-proving, on the other hand, finding a single path from known premises to the target is not necessarily very useful, because the truth-value estimate achieved via this path may have low confidence. Multiple paths may yield multiple truth-value estimates, which must then be revised or chosen between. These complexities make inference control subtler, and among other fac-tors they imply a more prominent role for “effort management.” It is often easy to find some path from premises to the target if we have no requirements for the re-sulting truth-value. Therefore, in PLN backward chaining we are in practice more interested in how many resources we are willing to allocate for improving the truth-value of the target by alternative inference paths, rather than aiming for the first possible path we can find. 
13.3.1  Atom Structure Templates In order to carry out an individual step in backward- or forward-chaining infe-rence, we need to be able to quickly figure out which rules can be applied to a cer-tain Atom (for forward chaining) or which rules can yield a certain Atom as output (for backward chaining). In order to be able to do this conveniently, we need a way to describe Atom properties in a concise way. We will do this with predicates called Atom structure templates. Given an Atom A, we may construct the predicate A^ so that A^(X) is true iff there is some Y so that A(Y)=X. In the case that A is a first-order Atom (a Term or a Relationship between Terms, with no variables or higher-order functions in-volved), then A^(X) is true iff X=A; but this is not the most interesting case.  E.g., for the Atoms  P = Inheritance A B  and  Q = Inheritance  A  $1   it is easy to see that Q^(P) is true (via the assignment $1=B) but P^(Q) is not.  We may also define more complex Atom types such as  HasTruthValueStrengthGreaterThan 

Probabilistic Logic Networks 268  $1  0.5  which can likewise be used as literals like any other Atoms, or as complex Atom structure templates that map Atoms into Boolean truth-values according to a spe-cific property, such as “whether the truth-value.strength of the argument Atom is greater than 0.5.”  Atom structure templates can also be used in conjunctions or disjunctions with other Atom structure templates. For example, the Atom structure template corres-ponding to  AND  HasTruthValueStrengthGreaterThan   $1   0.5  Inheritance   A   $1  is true of an Atom such that A inherits from it and its truth-value.strength > 0.5. 
13.3.2  Rules and Filters Recall the distinction between rules and formulas in PLN. A Formula is an ob-ject that maps a vector of truth-values into a single truth-value. For example, the deduction formula takes five truth-values and outputs the truth-value of the result-ing Inheritance or Implication relationship. On the other hand, a Rule is an object that maps a vector of Atoms into a single new Atom. Along the way it applies a designated formula to calculate the truth-values. For example, the deduction rule takes two Inheritance relationships (A,B) and (B,C) and outputs a single Inheri-tance relationship (A,C) with a truth-value calculated by the deduction formula. In the PLN software implementation, inference rules are represented by Rule objects. Each Rule object has both an input filter and an output-based-input filter, which will be used by forward chaining and backward chaining, respectively. The input filter is a vector of Atom structure templates that accept only specific kinds of argument Atoms in the respective place. For example, the input filter of Deduc-tionRule is the vector of two Atoms representing Atom structure templates:  InheritanceLink  $1  $2 InheritanceLink   $2 

269  Chapter 13: Aspects of Inference Control  $3.  The output-based-input filter is more complex. It is used to detemine which Atoms are needed as parameters for the Rule in order to produce Atoms of desired kind. For example, in order to produce the   InheritanceLink  A  C  by the DeductionRule you need to provide, as input to the DeductionRule, the Atoms that satisfy the Atom structure templates  InheritanceLink  A  $1  InheritanceLink  $1  C  Of course a specific target may not be producible by a given rule, in which case the procedure simply returns a null result. In order to produce two Atoms that sa-tisfy each one of the last two Atom structure templates, we need to begin a new proof process for each one separately, and so on. Since this particular proof con-tains Atom structure template variables, we must at some point unify the variables. Because they occur inside distinct Atoms, it may happen that a specific unification choice in one will prevent the production of the other altogether. We must then backtrack to this unification step, choose differently, and retry. Note that producing InheritanceLink($1, C) is very different from producing an Atom that satisfies the Atom structure template InheritanceLink($1,C)^. Typi-cally, in backward chaining we are interested in the latter. 
13.4  Simplification Some computational reasoning systems require all logical formulas to fall into a certain standard “normal form,” but this is not the case in PLN. There is the op-tion for normalization, and we plan to experiment with using Holman’s Elegant Normal Form (Holman 1990) in PLN, as we do in other aspects of the NCE, but normalization of this nature is not required. As a default, the PLN implementation does only some elementary normalizations, which are not profoundly necessary for PLN inference control but do serve to simplify things and reduce the number of Rule objects required. 

Probabilistic Logic Networks 270 Some “explicit” normalization happens in the proxy that the new Atoms pass before entering the knowledge base, and then some “implicit” normalization hap-pens in the structures used to manipulate the Atoms. An example of the former kind of normalization is conversion of EquivalenceLinks into two Implication-Links, while an example of the latter kind is the mechanism that considers identi-cal an Atom A and a single-member ListLink whose outgoing set consists of A. 
13.5 Backward Chaining We now describe the PLN backward-chaining inference process. Each step of this process is thought of as involving two substeps: expansion and evaluation. In the expansion step, the filters of Rule objects are used to figure out the possible child nodes for the current BIT (BackInferenceTree) node. These nodes are then inserted into an “expansion pool,” which contains all the nodes that can still be expanded to find additional proof paths. In the evaluation step the BIT is traversed from leaves towards the root, where children of a node are presented as input ar-guments to the Rule object that the parent node represents. Because each child is in general a set of possible solutions for the given Rule argument, we have multi-ple combinations of solutions to try out. As noted above, a central characteristic of PLN backward chaining is the fact that “topological” inference path-finding is only a subgoal of the main goal of PLN backward inference: maximizing the weight-of-evidence of the truth-value of the target Atom. So, in order to reach the latter goal, we may need to construct se-veral different inference trees, with inference paths that may have considerable “topological” overlap yet assign different truth-values even to the overlapping no-des.  This process of multiple-tree generation can conveniently be described in evo-lutionary terms, where the genotype of a Backward Inference Tree (BIT) consists of the individual Atoms and the Rules that combine them, while the weight of evi-dence of the result produced by the tree is its fitness. To calculate the fitness of a BIT it is necessary to evaluate all the proof pathways in the tree, and then combine the final query results using the Rule of Choice.  On the implementation level there is some subtlety involved in constructing the trees involved in backward-chaining inference, because the validity of a result may depend on other results that come from other branches. A whole new search tree must be created every time the production of a target Atom is attempted. To achieve this, on each attempt to produce a target Atom we save the partial tree produced thus far, and launch a new tree that contains only a pointer to the partial tree. Thus, the task of improving the truth-value of an Atom requires partial or complete reconstruction of the proof tree several times. Therefore, a critical im-plementation requirement is the efficiency of the “retry mechanism” that allows for this.  

271  Chapter 13: Aspects of Inference Control Managing variable bindings in this tree expansion process is also tricky. In this approach, to carry out backward-chaining inference, you expand the inference tree step-by-step, and you may evaluate the fitness of the tree after any step. To produ-ce each subresult several Rules can be invoked, causing bifurcation. At the time of evaluation, some subresults are in fact sets of results obtained via different path-ways. Hence, the evaluation step must look at all the consistent conbinations of these; consistency here meaning that bindings of the subresults used in a specific combination must not conflict with each other. Ideally, one might want to check for binding consistency at the expansion stage and simply discard conflicting re-sults. However, in case of conflict we do not in general know which ones of the conflicting bindings are worse ( i.e., will contribute to lower ultimate fitness) than others. Hence, it is best to do the consistency check at the evaluation stage. 
13.6 Simple BIT Pruning For pruning of the backward-chaining inference tree, we use initially a techni-que based on the multi-armed bandit problem from statistics (Robbins 1952; Sut-ton, Bartow 1998.) Consider first a relatively simple case: the backward-chainer wants to expand a given node N of the BIT it is creating, and there is a number of possibilities for expansion, corresponding to a number of different rules that may possibly give ri-se to the expression contained at node N. Some of these have not yet been tried, but these have a priori probabilities, which may be set based on the general use-fulness of the corresponding rule, or in a more sophisticated system based on the empirical usefulness of the rule in related contexts. Some may have already been expanded before, yielding a truth-value estimate with a known strength and weight of evidence.  Then, in our current inference control approach, each possibility for expansion (each rule) must be assigned an “expected utility” number indicating the probabili-ty distribution governing the degree of fitness increase expected to ensue from ex-ploring this possibility. For unexplored possibilities this utility number must be the a priori probability of the rule in that context. For possibilities already extensi-vely explored, this utility number may be calculated in terms of the weight of evi-dence of the truth-value estimate obtained via exploring this possibility, and the amount of computational effort expended in calculating this truth-value.  Regarding unexplored or lightly-explored possibilities, the two heuristics used to set the “a priori” utilities for BIT nodes are:  1. Solution space size: Prefer nodes with more restrictive proof targets (i.e., ones with fewer free variables and more structure). 2. Rule priority: Prefer e.g. direct atom lookup to a purely hypothetical guess.  

Probabilistic Logic Networks 272 To take into account information gained by prior exploration of a BIT node, one may utilize a simple heuristic formula such as  u = d/E = weight_of_evidence / effort  or more generally  u = = F/E = fitness / effort  (where e.g. fitness might be measured as weight_of_evidence*strength).  A more sophisticated variant might weight these two factors, yielding e.g.  u = Fa/Eb  Given these probabilities, an avenue for expanding the node may be selected via any one of many standard algorithms for handling multi-armed bandit prob-lems; for initial experimentation we have chosen the SoftMax algorithm (Sutton, Bartow 1998), which simply chooses an avenue to explore at random, with a pro-bability proportional to   eu/T  where T is a temperature parameter. High temperatures make all possibilities equiprobable whereas T=0 causes the method to emulate greedy search (via al-ways following the most probable path). One of the strengths of this overall approach to inference control is its capabi-lity to incorporate, into each inference step, information gained via other sorts of inference or via non-inferential processes.  This is particularly valuable when con-sidering PLN as a component of an integrative AI system.  For instance, if en-counters the link  ExtensionalInheritance A B  as a possibility for exploration in a BIT, then a reasonable heuristic is to check for the existence and truth value of the link h  IntensionalInheritance A B  If A and B share a lot of properties, they may heuristically be guessed to share a lot of members; etc.  Or, if there is no existing information directly pertinent to the ExtensionalInheritance relation being considered, and there are sufficient computational resources available, it might be worthwhile to execute some other non-inferential cognitive process aimed at gathering more relevant information; for instance, if many links of the form  

273  Chapter 13: Aspects of Inference Control MemberLink Ci B  are available, an evolutionary learning or other supervised categorization algo-rithm could be used to learn a set of logical rules characterizing the members of B, which could then be used in the inference process to gain additional information potentially pertinent to estimating the utility of expanding  ExtensionalInheritance A B 
13.7  Pruning BITs in the Context of Rules with Interdependent Arguments The pruning situation becomes more complex when we consider rules such as Deduction, which take arguments that depend on each other. For Deduction to produce Implication(A,C), input arguments are of the form (Implication(A,$1), Implication($1,C)) where $1 is a variable. Naively, one might just want to simpli-fy this by looking up only Atom pairs that simultaneously satisfy both require-ments. This fails, however, because we must also be able to produce both argu-ments by our regular inference process. So for each argument a separate inference tree is created, and the consistency check must be postponed.  Expanding both branches independent of each other is wasteful, because once we find a good result for one of the arguments in that branch, e.g., binding $1 to B, we would like to bias the inference in the other branch toward being consistent with this;  i.e., producing Implication(B,C).  One approach would be to launch a new separate proof process for this purpo-se, but this is difficult to implement because in general there are other things going on in the proof beside this single (e.g., deduction) step, and we would like to have only a single control path. In this hypothetical approach it would be unclear when exactly we should continue with this proof process and when with the other one(s). A simpler approach is to create a clone of the parent of the current inference tree node, with the one difference that in this new node the said variable (B) has been bound. The new node is then added to the execution pool. This may seem counter-intuitive because we do not restrict the possible proof paths, but simply add a new one. For example, suppose that in this example Impli-cation($1,C) is still in the expansion pool, and the Implication(A,$1) is currently under expansion. The expansion produces result Implication(A,B). Then, the exe-cution pool will contain both Implication($1,C) and Implication(B,C). Note that the whole execution pool will typically not be exhausted, but we only expand a part of it until a sufficiently fit result has been found. Further, we have set the default utilities so that Implication(B,C) has a higher a priori utility than Implication($1,C) because these nodes are identical in all other respects, but the 

Probabilistic Logic Networks 274 former has fewer free variables and therefore a smaller solution space. It follows that the proof for Implication(B,C) will be attempted before the more general Im-plication($1,C). Of course, if Implication(B,C) does not exist and has to be produ-ced by inference, then the process may end up expanding Implication($1,C) before it has been able to produce Implication(B,C). But this is fine because Implicati-on(B,C) was simply our first guess, and if the Atom does not exist we have no strong reason to believe that the binding $1=>B should be superior to other alter-natives. The bandit problem based approach mentioned above may still be used in the more complex case of rules like deduction with interdependent arguments, but the method of calculating u must be modified slightly. In this case, the probability as-signed to a given possible expansion might (to cite one sensible formula out of many possible ones, and to use the ”weight of evidence” fitness function purely for sake of exemplification) be set equal to   u = (d1d2)a/Eb  where d1 is the weight of evidence of the truth-value output by the expansion no-de, and d2 is the weight of evidence of the inference rule output produced using the output of the expansion node as input. For instance, if doing a deduction  Inheritance A B <[0.8, 0.9], 0.9, 10> Inheritance B C <[0.7, 0.8], 0.9, 10> |- Inheritance A C <[0.618498, 0.744425], 0.9, 10>  then a particular way of producing  Inheritance A B   would be assigned d1 based on the weight of evidence obtained for the latter link this way, and would be assigned d2 based on the weight of evidence obtained for   Inheritance A C  this way. 
13.8 Forward-Chaining Inference Finally, we consider the problem of forward-chaining inference. This is very closely comparable to backward-chaining inference, with the exception that the method of calculating utility used inside the bandit problem calculation is diffe-rent. One is no longer trying to choose a path likely to yield maximum increase of 

275  Chapter 13: Aspects of Inference Control weight of evidence, but rather a path likely to yield this along with maximum “in-terestingness” according to some specified criterion. For example, one definition of interestingness is simply deviation from probabilistic independence. Another, more general definition is the difference in the result obtained by evaluating the truth-value of the Atom with very little effort versus a large amount of effort. So one might have  u = Ic da/Eb  where I measures interestingness; or more general versions where e.g. the weight of evidence d is replaced with some other fitness function.  The measurement of interestingness is a deep topic unto itself, which brings us beyond PLN proper; however, one PLN-related way to gauge the interestingness of an Atom, relative to a knowledge base, is to ask how different the Atom’s actual truth value is, from the truth value that would be inferred for the Atom if it were removed and then had its truth value supplied by inference.  This measures how much surprisingness the Atom’s truth value contains, relative to the surrounding knowledge. Of course, forward-chaining inference can also invoke backward-chaining infe-rence as a subordinate process. Once it has happened upon an interesting Atom, it can then invoke backward chaining to more thoroughly evaluate the truth-value of this Atom via a variety of different paths. Very shallow forward-chaining inference may be used as a method of “concept creation.” For instance, there is value in a process that simply searches for interes-ting Boolean combinations of Atoms. This may be done by randomly selecting combinations of Atoms and using them as premises for a few steps of forward-chaining inference. These combinations will then remain in memory to be used in future forward- or backward-chaining inference processes. 
13.9 Default Inference Inference control contains a great number of subtleties, only a small minority of which has been considered here. Before leaving the topic we will consider one additional aspect, lying at the borderline between inference control, PLN inference proper, and cognitive science. This is the notion of “default inheritance,” which plays a role in computational linguistics within the Word Grammar framework (Hudson 1984), and also plays a central role in various species of nonmonotonic “default logic” (Reiter, 1980; Delgrande and Schaub, 2003). The treatment of de-fault inference in PLN exemplifies how, in the PLN framework, judicious infer-ence control and intelligent integration of PLN with other structures may be used to achieve things that, in other logic frameworks, need to be handled via explicit extension of the logic. To exemplify the notion of default inheritance, consider the case of penguins, which do not fly, although they are a subclass of birds, which do fly. When one 

Probabilistic Logic Networks 276 discovers a new type of penguin, say an Emperor penguin, one reasons initially that they do not fly – i.e., one reasons by reference to the new type’s immediate parent in the ontological hierarchy, rather than its grandparent. In some logical in-ference frameworks, the notion of hierarchy is primary and default inheritance of this nature is wired in at the inference rule level. But this is not the case with PLN – in PLN, correct treatment of default inheritance must come indirectly out of other mechanisms. Fortunately, this can be achieved in a fairly simple and natural way. Consider the two inferences (expressed informally, as we are presenting a con-ceptual discussion not yet formalized in PLN terms)  A) penguin --> fly <0> bird --> penguin <.02> |- bird --> fly  B) penguin --> bird <1> bird --> fly <.9> |- penguin --> fly  The correct behavior according to the default inheritance idea is that, in a sys-tem that already knows at least a moderate amount about the flight behavior of birds and penguins, inference A should be accepted but inference B should not. That is, evidence about penguins should be included in determining whether birds can fly – even if there is already some general knowledge about the flight behavior of birds in the system. But evidence about birds in general should not be included in estimating whether penguins can fly, if there is already at least a moderate level of knowledge that in fact penguins are atypical birds in regard to flight. But how can the choice of A over B be motivated in terms of PLN theory? The essence of the answer is simple: in case B the independence assumption at the heart of the deduction rule is a bad one. Within the scope of birds, being a penguin and being a flier are not at all independent. On the other hand, looking at A, we see that within the scope of penguins, being a bird and being a flier are independ-ent. So the reason B is ruled out is that if there is even a moderate amount of knowledge about the truth-value of (penguin --> fly), this gives a hint that apply-ing the deduction rule’s independence assumption in this case is badly wrong. On the other hand, what if a mistake is made and the inference B is done any-way? In this case the outcome could be that the system erroneously increases its estimate of the strength of the statement that penguins can fly. On the other hand, the revision rule may come to the rescue here. If the prior strength of (penguin --> fly) is 0, and inference B yields a strength of .9 for the same proposition, then the special case of the revision rule that handles wildly different truth-value estimates 

277  Chapter 13: Aspects of Inference Control may be triggered. If the 0 strength has much more confidence attached to it than the .9, then they won’t be merged together, because it will be assumed that the .9 is an observational or inference error. Either the .9 will be thrown out, or it will be provisionally held as an alternate, non-merged, low-confidence hypothesis, await-ing further validation or refutation. What is more interesting, however, is to consider the implications of the de-fault inference notion for inference control. It seems that the following may be a valuable inference control heuristic:   1. Arrange terms in a hierarchy; e.g., by finding a spanning DAG of the terms in a knowledge base, satisfying certain criteria (e.g., maximiz-ing total strength*confidence within a fixed limitation on the number of links). 2. When reasoning about a term, first do deductive reasoning involving the term’s immediate parents in the hierarchy, and then ascend the hierarchy, looking at each hierarchical level only at terms that were not visited at lower hierarchical levels.  This is precisely the “default reasoning” idea – but the key point is that in PLN it lives at the level of inference control, not inference rules or formulas. In PLN, default reasoning is a timesaving heuristic, not an elementary aspect of the logic itself. Rather, the practical viability of the default-reasoning inference-control heu-ristic is a consequence of various other elementary aspects of the logic, such as the ability to detect dependencies rendering the deduction rule inapplicable, and the way the revision rule deals with wildly disparate estimates. 

Probabilistic Logic Networks 278  

279 
