Chapter 3: Experiential Semantics 
Abstract   Chapter 3 is a brief chapter in which we discuss the conceptual inter-pretation of the terms used in PLN, according to the scheme we have deployed when utilizing PLN to carry out inferences regarding the experience of an embod-ied agent in a simulated world. This is what we call “experiential semantics.”  The PLN mathematics may also be applied using different semantic assumptions, for instance in a logical theorem-proving context. But the development of PLN has been carried out primarily in the context of experiential semantics, and that will be our focus here. 
3.1 Introduction Most of the material in this book is mathematical and formal rather than phi-losophical in nature. Ultimately, however, the mathematics of uncertain logic is only useful when incorporated into a practical context involving non-logical as well as logical aspects; and the integration of logic with non-logic necessarily re-quires the conceptual interpretation of logical entities.  The basic idea of experiential semantics is that the interpretation of PLN terms and relationships should almost always be made in terms of the observations made by a specific system in interacting with the world. (Some of these observations may, of course, be observations of the system itself.)   The numerous examples given in later (and prior) sections regarding “individuals” such as people, cats and so forth, can’t really be properly interpreted without attention to this fact, and in particular to the experiential semantics of individuals to be presented here. What makes PLN’s experience-based semantics subtle, however, is that there are many PLN terms and relationships that don’t refer directly to anything in the world the PLN reasoning system is observing. But even for the most abstract relationships and concepts expressed in PLN, the semantics must ultimately be grounded in ob-servations.  

Probabilistic Logic Networks  42  3.2 Semantics of Observations In experiential semantics, we are considering PLN as a reasoning system in-tended for usage by an embodied AI agent: one with perceptions and actions as well as cognitions. The first step toward concretizing this perspective is to define what we mean by observations.  While PLN is mostly about statements with probabilistic truth values, at the most basic semantic level it begins with Boolean truth-valued statements. We call these basic Boolean truth-valued statements “elementary observations.”   Elemen-tary observations may be positive or negative. A positive observation is one that occurred; a negative observation is one that did not occur. Elementary observa-tions have the property of unity: each positive elementary observation occurs once. This occurrence may be effectively instantaneous or it may be spread over a long period of time. But each elementary observation occurs once and is associ-ated with one particular set of time-points. In the experiential-semantics approach, PLN’s probabilistic statements may all ultimately be interpreted as statements about sets of elementary observations. In set-theoretic language, these elementary observations are “atoms” and PLN Con-cept terms are sets built up from these “atoms.”  However we won’t use that ter-minology much here, since in PLN the term Atom is used to refer to any PLN term or relationship. Instead, we will call these “elementary terms.”  In an experi-ential-semantics approach to PLN, these are the basic terms out of which the other PLN terms and relationships are built.  For example, in the context of an AI system with a camera eye sensor, an ele-mentary observation might be the observation A defined by  A = "the color of the pixel at location (100, 105) is  blue at time 2:13:22PM on Tuesday January 6, 2004."   Each elementary observation may be said to contain a certain number of bits of information; for instance, an observation of a color pixel contains more bits of in-formation than an observation of a black-and-white pixel. 
3.2.1  Inference on Elementary Observations Having defined elementary observations, one may wish to draw implication re-lationships between them. For instance, if we define the elementary observations  

43  Chapter 3: Experiential Semantics B = "blue was observed by me at time 2:13:22PM on  Tuesday January 6, 2004"  C = "blue was observed by me on Tuesday January 6,  2004"  then we may observe that  A implies B B implies C A implies C  However, the semantics of this sort of implication is somewhat subtle. Since each elementary observation occurs only once, there is no statistical basis on which to create implications between them. To interpret implications between elementary observations, one has to look across multiple “possible universes,” and observe that for instance, in any possible universe in which A holds, C also holds. This is a valid form of implication, but it’s a subtle one and occurs as a later de-velopment in PLN semantics, rather than at a foundational level. 
3.2.2  Inference on Sets of Elementary Observations Next, sets of elementary observations may be formed and their unions and in-tersections may be found, and on this basis probabilistic logical relationships be-tween these sets may be constructed. For instance, if  X = the set of all observations of dark blue Y = the set of all observations of blue  then it’s easy to assign values to P(X|Y) and P(Y|X) based on experience.  P(X|Y) = the percentage of observations of blue that are also observations of dark blue P(Y|X) = 1, because all observations of dark blue are observations of blue  Probabilistic inference on sets of observations becomes interesting because, in real-world intelligence, each reasoning system collects far more observations than it can retain or efficiently access. Thus it may retain the fact that   P(dark blue | blue) = .3  

Probabilistic Logic Networks  44  without retaining the specific examples on which this observation is founded. The existence of “ungrounded” probabilistic relationships such as this leads to the need for probabilistic inference using methods like the PLN rules. In this context we may introduce the notion of “intension,” considered broadly as “the set of attributes possessed by a term.”   This is usually discussed in con-trast to “extension,” which is considered as the elements in the set denoted by a term. In the absence of ungrounded probabilities, inference on sets of observations can be purely extensional. However, if a reasoning system has lost information about the elements of a set of observations, but still knows other sets the set be-longs to, or various conditional probabilities relating the set to other sets, then it may reason about the set using this indirect information rather than the (forgotten) members of the set – and this reasoning may be considered “intensional.”  This is a relatively simple case of intensionality, as compared to intensionality among in-dividuals and sets thereof, which will be discussed below. 
3.3 Semantics of Individuals  While the basic semantics of PLN is founded on observations, most of the con-crete PLN examples we will give in these pages involve individual entities (peo-ple, animals, countries, and so forth) rather than directly involving observations. The focus on individuals in this text reflects the level at which linguistic discourse generally operates, and shouldn’t be taken as a reflection of the level of applicabil-ity of PLN: PLN is as applicable to perception-and-action-level elementary obser-vations as it is to abstract inferences about individuals and categories of individu-als. However, reasoning about individuals is obviously a very important aspect of commonsense reasoning; and so, in this section, we give an explicit treatment of the semantics of individuals. Reasoning regarding individuals is a somewhat sub-tler issue than reasoning regarding observations, because the notion of an “indi-vidual” is not really a fundamental concept in mathematical logic.  Conventional approaches to formalizing commonsense inference tend to con-fuse things by taking individuals as logical atoms. In fact, in the human mind or the mind of any AI system with a genuine comprehension of the world, individu-als are complex cognitive constructs. Observations are much more naturally taken as logical atoms, from a mathematical and philosophical and cognitive-science point of view. However, from a practical commonsense reasoning point of view, if one takes elementary observations as logical atoms, then inference regarding indi-viduals can easily become horribly complex, because the representation of a pragmatically interesting individual in terms of elementary observations is gener-ally extremely complex. PLN works around this problem by synthesizing individ-ual-level and observation-level inference in a way that allows individual-level in-ference to occur based implicitly on observation-level semantics. This is a subtle point that is easy to miss when looking at practical PLN inference examples, in which individual- and observation-level semantics are freely intermixed in a con-

45  Chapter 3: Experiential Semantics sistent way. This free intermixture is only possible because the conceptual founda-tions of PLN have been set up in a proper way. Let’s consider an example of an individual: the orange cat named Stripedog1 who is sitting near me (Ben Goertzel) as I write these words. What is Stripedog? In PLN terms, Stripedog is first of all a complex predicate formed from elemen-tary observations. Given a set of elementary observations, my mind can evaluate whether this set of observations is indicative of Stripedog’s presence or not. It does so by evaluating a certain predicate whose input argument is a set of elemen-tary observations and whose output is a truth value indicating the “degree of Stripedogness” of the observation set. At this point we may introduce the notion of the “usefulness” of an argument for a predicate, which will be important later on. If a predicate P is applied to an observation set S, and an observation O lies in S, then we say that O is important for (P, S) if removing O from S would alter the strength of the truth value of P as applied to S. Otherwise O is unimportant for (P, S). We will say that an observa-tion set S is an identifier for P if one of two conditions holds:  Positive identifier: S contains no elements that are unimportant for (P, S), or Negative identifier: P applied to S gives a value of 0  Of course, in addition to the observational model of Stripedog mentioned above, I also have an abstract model of Stripedog in my mind. According to this abstract model, Stripedog is a certain pattern of arrangement of molecules. The in-dividual molecules arranged in the Stripedogish pattern are constantly disappear-ing and being replaced, but the overall pattern of arrangement is retained. This ab-stract model of Stripedog exists in my mind because I have an abstract model of the everyday physical world in my mind, and I have some (largely ungrounded) implications that tell me that when a Stripedoggish elementary observation set is presented to me, this implies that a Stripedoggish pattern of arrangement of mole-cules is existent in the physical world that I hypothesize to be around me. The Stripedog-recognizing predicate, call it FStripedog, has a SatisfyingSet that we may denote simply as stripedog, defined by  ExtensionalEquivalence Member $X stripedog  AND Evaluation FStripedog $X   Evaluation isIdentifier ($X, FStripedog)  The predicate isIdentifier(S,P) returns True if and only if the set S is an identifier for the predicate P, in the sense defined above.                                                              1 In case you’re curious, “Stripedog” is a colloquialism for “badger” -- a word that Ben Goertzel’s son Zebulon discovered in the Redwall books by Brian Jacques, and decided was an excellent name for a cute little orange kitten-cat. 

Probabilistic Logic Networks  46  This set, stripedog, is the set of all observation sets that are identifiers for the individual cat named Stripedog, with a fuzzy truth value function defined by the extent to which an observation set is identified as being an observation of Stripe-dog. 
3.3.1  Properties of Individuals Now, there may be many predicates that imply and/or are implied by FStripedog to various degrees. For instance there’s a predicate Fliving_being that says true whenever a living being is observed; clearly  Implication FStripedog Fliving_being  holds with a strength near 1 (a strength 1 so far, based on direct observation, since Stripedog has not yet been seen dead; but a strength <1 based on inference since it’s inferred that it’s not impossible, though unlikely, to see him dead). And,   Implication FStripedog Forange<.8,.99>  holds as well – the .8 being because when Stripedog is seen at night, he doesn’t look particularly orange. Those predicates that are probabilistically implied by the Stripedog-defining predicate are what we call properties of Stripedog.  Note that if  Implication F G  holds, then  Inheritance (SatisfyingSet F) (SatisfyingSet G)  holds. So properties of Stripedog correspond to observation sets that include ob-servations of Stripedog plus other, non-Stripedoggish observations. 
3.4 Experiential Semantics and Term Probabilities Another conceptual issue that arises in PLN related to experiential semantics is the use of term probabilities. It is reasonable to doubt whether a construct such as P(cat) or P(Stripedog) makes any common sense – as opposed to conditional probabilities denoting the probabilities of these entities in some particular con-texts. In fact we believe there is a strong cognitive reason for a commonsense rea-

47  Chapter 3: Experiential Semantics soning engine to use default term probabilities, and one that ties in with experien-tial semantics and merits explicit articulation. The key point is that the default probability of a term represents the probability relative to the context of the entire universe as intellectually understood by the reasoning system. This would be nebulous to define and of extremely limited util-ity. Rather, a term probability should represent the probability of the class denoted by the term relative to the organism’s (direct and indirect) experience.  An analogy to everyday human experience may be worthwhile. Outside of formal contexts like science and mathematics, human organisms carry out com-monsense reasoning within the default context of their everyday embodied life. So for instance in our everyday thinking we assume as a default that cats are more common than three-eared wombats. Though we can override this if the specific context calls for it. So, we conjecture, the term probability of “cat” in a typical human mind is shorthand for “the term probability of cat in the default context of my everyday life” – but it is not represented anything like this; rather, the “everyday life” con-text is left implicit. Formalistically, we could summarize the above discussion by saying that: The default term probability of X is the weighted average of the probability of X across all contexts C, where each context C is weighted by its importance to the organism. In this sense, default term probabilities become more heuristic than context-specific probabilities. And they also require concepts outside PLN for their defini-tion, relying on the embedding of PLN in some broader embodied cognition framework such as the NCE. The conceptual reason why this kind of default node probability is useful is that doing all reasoning contextually is expensive, as there are so many contexts. So as an approximation, assuming a default experiential context is very useful. But the subtlety is that for an organism that can read, speak, listen, and so forth, the “eve-ryday experiential context” needs to go beyond what is directly experienced with the senses. 
3.5 Conclusion In this brief chapter, beginning with elementary observations, we have built up to individuals and their properties. The semantic, conceptual notions presented here need not be invoked explicitly when reviewing the bulk of the material in this book, which concerns the mathematics of uncertain truth value estimation in PLN. However, when interpreting examples involving terms with names like “Ben” and “cat”, it is important to remember that in the context of the reasoning carried out by an embodied agent, such terms are not elementary indecomposables but rather complex constructs built up in a subtle way from a large body of elementary ob-servations. 

Probabilistic Logic Networks  48   

49 
