Chapter 4: Indefinite Truth Values Abstract In this chapter we develop a new approach to quantifying uncertainty via a hybridization of Walley’s theory of imprecise probabilities and Bayesian credi-ble intervals. This “indefinite probability” approach provides a general method for calculating the “weight-of-evidence” underlying the conclusions of uncertain in-ferences. Moreover, both Walley’s imprecise beta-binomial model and standard Bayesian inference can be viewed mathematically as special cases of the more general indefinite probability model.  
4.1 Introduction One of the major issues with probability theory as standardly utilized involves the very quantification of the uncertainty associated with statements that serve as premises or conclusions of inference. Using a single number to quantify the uncer-tainty of a statement is often not sufficient, a point made very eloquently by Wang (Wang 2004), who argues in detail that the standard Bayesian approach does not offer any generally viable way to assess or reason about the “second-order uncer-tainty” involved in a given probability assignment. Probability theory provides richer mechanisms than this: one may assign a probability distribution to a state-ment, instead of a single probability value. But what if one doesn’t have the data to fill in a probability distribution in detail? What is the (probabilistically) best ap-proach to take in the case where a single number is not enough but the available data doesn’t provide detailed distributional information? Current probability the-ory does not address this issue adequately. Yet this is a critical question if one wants to apply probability theory in a general intelligence context. In short, one needs methods of quantifying uncertainty at an intermediate level of detail be-tween single probability numbers and fully known probability distributions. This is what we mean by the question: What should an uncertain truth-value be, so that a general intelligence may use it for pragmatic reasoning? 
4.2 From Imprecise Probabilities to Indefinite Probabilities Walley’s (Walley 1991) theory of imprecise probabilities seeks to address this issue, via defining interval probabilities, with interpretations in terms of families of probability distributions. The idea of interval probabilities was originally intro-                                                             

Probabilistic Logic Networks 50 duced by Keynes (Keynes 1921, 2004), but Walley’s version is more rigorous, grounded in the theory of envelopes of probability distributions. Walley’s inter-vals, so-called “imprecise probabilities,” are satisfyingly natural and consistent in the way they handle uncertain and incomplete information. However, in spite of a fair amount of attention over the years, this line of research has not yet been de-veloped to the point of yielding robustly applicable mathematics. Using a parametrized envelope of (beta-distribution) priors rather than assum-ing a single prior as would be typical in the Bayesian approach, Walley (Walley 1991, 1996) concludes that it is plausible to represent probabilities as intervals of the form 
! mn+k,m+kn+k" # $ % & ' . In this formula n represents the total number of observa-tions, m represents the number of positive observations, and k is a parameter that Walley calls s and derives as a parameter of the beta distribution. Walley calls this parameter the learning parameter, while we will refer to it as the lookahead pa-rameter. Note that the width of the interval of probabilities is inversely related to the number of observations n, so that the more evidence one has, the narrower the interval. The parameter k determines how rapidly this narrowing occurs. An inter-val of this sort is what Walley calls an “imprecise probability.” Walley’s approach comes along with a host of elegant mathematics including a Generalized Bayes’ Theorem. However it is not the only approach to interval probabilities. For instance, one alternative is Weichselberger’s (Weichselberger, 2003) axiomatic approach, which works with sets of probabilities of the form [L, U] and implies that Walley’s generalization of Bayes’ rule is not the correct one. One practical issue with using interval probabilities like Walley’s or Weichsel-berger’s in the context of probabilistic inference rules (such as those used in PLN) is the pessimism implicit in interval arithmetic. If one takes traditional probabilis-tic calculations and simplistically replaces the probabilities with intervals, then one finds that the intervals rapidly expand to [0, 1]. This fact simply reflects the fact that the intervals represent “worst case” bounds. This same problem also af-fects Walley’s and Weichselberger’s more sophisticated approaches, and other ap-proaches in the imprecise probabilities literature. The indefinite probabilities ap-proach presented here circumvents these practical problems by utilizing interval probabilities that have a different sort of semantics – closely related to, but not the same as, those of Walley’s interval probabilities. Indefinite probabilities, as we consider them here, are represented by quadru-ples of the form <(L, U], b, k>– thus, they contain two additional numbers beyond the [L, U] interval truth values proposed by Keynes, and one number beyond the <(L, U], k> formalism proposed by Walley. The semantics involved in assigning such a truth value to a statement S is, roughly, “I assign a probability of b to the hypothesis that, after I have observed k more pieces of evidence, the truth value I assign to S will lie in the interval [L, U].” In the practical examples presented here we will hold k constant and thus will deal with truth value triples <(L, U], b>. The inclusion of the value b, which defines the credibility level according to which [L, U] is a credible interval (for hypothesized future assignments of the 

51 Chapter 4: Indefinite Truth Values  probability of S, after observing k more pieces of evidence), is what allows our in-tervals to generally remain narrower than those produced by existing imprecise probability approaches. If b=1, then our approach essentially reduces to imprecise probabilities, and in pragmatic inference contexts tends to produce intervals [L, U] that approach [0, 1]. The use of b<1 allows the inferential production of narrower intervals, which are more useful in a real-world inference context. In practice, to execute inferences using indefinite probabilities we make heuris-tic distributional assumptions, assuming a “second-order” distribution which has [L, U] as a (100*b)% credible interval, and then “first-order” distributions whose means are drawn from the second-order distribution. These distributions are to be viewed as heuristic approximations intended to estimate unknown probability val-ues existing in hypothetical future situations. The utility of the indefinite probabil-ity approach may be dependent on the appropriateness of the particular distribu-tional assumptions to the given application situation. But in practice we have found that a handful of distributional forms seem to suffice to cover commonsense inferences (beta and bimodal forms seem good enough for nearly all cases; and here we will give only examples covering the beta distribution case). Because the semantics of indefinite probabilities is different from that of ordi-nary probabilities, or imprecise probabilities, or for example NARS truth values, it is not possible to say objectively that any one of these approaches is “better” than the other one, as a mathematical formalism. Each approach is better than the oth-ers at mathematically embodying its own conceptual assumptions. From an AGI perspective, the value of an approach to quantifying uncertainty lies in its useful-ness when integrated with a pragmatic probabilistic reasoning engine. While com-plicated and dependent on many factors, this is nevertheless the sort of evaluation that we consider most meaningful. Section 4.3 deals with the conceptual foundations of indefinite probabilities, clarifying their semantics in the context of Bayesian and frequentist philosophies of probability. Section 4.4 outlines the pragmatic computational method we use for doing probabilistic and heuristic inference using indefinite probabilities. 
4.3 The Semantics of Uncertainty The main goal of this chapter is to present indefinite probabilities as a prag-matic tool for uncertain inference, oriented toward utilization in AGI systems. Before getting practical, however, we will pause in this section to discuss the con-ceptual, semantic foundations of the “indefinite probability” notion. In the course of developing the indefinite probabilities approach, we found that the thorniest as-pects lay not in the mathematics or software implementation, but rather in the con-ceptual interpretation of the truth values and their roles in inference. In the philosophy of probability, there are two main approaches to interpreting the meaning of probability values, commonly labeled frequentist and Bayesian (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy 2003). There are many shades of meaning 

Probabilistic Logic Networks 52 to each interpretation, but the essential difference is easy to understand. The fre-quentist approach holds that a probability should be interpreted as the limit of the relative frequency of an event-category, calculated over a series of events as the length of the series tends to infinity. The subjectivist or Bayesian approach holds that a probability should be interpreted as the degree of belief in a statement, held by some observer; or in other words, as an estimate of how strongly an observer believes the evidence available to him supports the statement in question. Early proponents of the subjectivist view were Ramsey (Ramsey 1931) and de Finetti (de Finetti 1974-75), who argued that for an individual to display self-consistent betting behavior they would need to assess degrees of belief according to the laws of probability theory. More recently Cox’s theorem (Cox 1946) and related mathematics (Hardy 2002) have come into prominence as providing a rigorous foundation for subjectivist probability. Roughly speaking, this mathematical work shows that if the observer assessing subjective probabilities is to be logically con-sistent, then their plausibility estimates must obey the standard rules of probabil-ity.  From a philosophy-of-AI point of view, neither the frequentist nor the subjec-tivist interpretations, as commonly presented, is fully satisfactory. However, for reasons to be briefly explained here, we find the subjectivist interpretation more acceptable, and will consider indefinite probabilities within a subjectivist context, utilizing relative frequency calculations for pragmatic purposes but giving them an explicitly subjectivist rather than frequentist interpretation. The frequentist interpretation is conceptually problematic in that it assigns probabilities only in terms of limits of sequences, not in terms of finite amounts of data. Furthermore, it has well-known difficulties with the assignment of probabili-ties to unique events that are not readily thought of as elements of ensembles. For instance, what was the probability, in 1999, of the statement S holding that “A great depression will be brought about by the Y2K problem”? Yes, this probability can be cast in terms of relative frequencies in various ways. For instance, one can define it as a relative frequency across a set of hypothetical “possible worlds”: across all possible worlds similar to our own, in how many of them did the Y2K problem bring about a great depression? But it’s not particularly natural to assume that this is what an intelligence must do in order to assign a probability to S. It would be absurd to claim that, in order to assign a probability to S, an intelligence must explicitly reason in terms of an ensemble of possible worlds. Rather, the claim must be that whatever reasoning a mind does to evaluate the probability of S may be implicitly interpreted in terms of possible worlds. This is not completely senseless, but is a bit of an irritating conceptual stretch. The subjectivist approach, on the other hand, is normally conceptually founded either on rational betting behaviors or on Cox’s theorem and its generalizations, both of which are somewhat idealistic. No intelligent agent operating within a plausible amount of resources can em-body fully self-consistent betting behavior in complex situations. The irrationality of human betting behavior is well known; to an extent this is due to emotional rea-

53 Chapter 4: Indefinite Truth Values  sons, but there are also practical limitations on the complexity of the situation in which any finite mind can figure out the correct betting strategy. And similarly, it is too much to expect any severely resource-constrained intel-ligence to be fully self-consistent in the sense that the assumptions of Cox’s theo-rem require. In order to use Cox’s theorem to justify the use of probability theory by practical intelligences, it seems to us, one would need to take another step be-yond Cox, and argue that if an AI system is going to have a “mostly sensible” measure of plausibility (i.e., if its deviation from Cox’s axioms are not too great), then its intrinsic plausibility measure must be similar to probability. We consider this to be a viable line of argument, but will pursue this point in another paper – to enlarge on such matters here would take us too far afield. Walley’s approach to representing uncertainty is based explicitly on a Baye-sian, subjectivist interpretation; though whether his mathematics has an alternate frequentist interpretation is something he has not explored, to our knowledge. Similarly, our approach here is to take a subjectivist perspective on the founda-tional semantics of indefinite probabilities (although we don’t consider this critical to our approach; quite likely it could be given a frequentist interpretation as well). Within our basic subjectivist interpretation, however, we will frequently utilize relative frequency calculations when convenient for pragmatic reasoning. This is conceptually consistent because within the subjectivist perspective there is still a role for relative frequency calculations, so long as they are properly interpreted. Specifically, when handling a conditional probability P(A|B), it may be the case that there is a decomposition B=B1+...+Bn so that the Bi are mutually exclusive and equiprobable, and each of P(A|Bi) is either 0 or 1. In this case the laws of probabil-ity tell us P(A|B) = P(A|B1) P(B1| B) + ... + P(A|Bn) P(Bn|B) = (P(A|B1) + ... + P(A|Bn))/n, which is exactly a relative frequency. So, in the case of statements that are decomposable in this sense, the Bayesian interpretation implies a relative fre-quency based interpretation (but not a “frequentist” interpretation in the classical sense). For decomposable statements, plausibility values may be regarded as the means of probability distributions, where the distributions may be derived via sub-sampling (sampling subsets C of {B1,...,Bn}, calculating P(A|C) for each subset, and taking the distribution of these values; as in the statistical technique known as bootstrapping). In the case of the “Y2K” statement and other similar statements regarding unique instances, one option is to think about decomposability across possible worlds, which is conceptually controversial. 
4.4 Indefinite Probability We concur with the subjectivist maxim that a probability can usefully be inter-preted as an estimate of the plausibility of a statement, made by some observer. However, we suggest introducing into this notion a more careful consideration of the role of evidence in the assessment of plausibility. We introduce a distinction that we feel is critical, between 

Probabilistic Logic Networks 54 • the ordinary (or “definite”) plausibility of a statement, interpreted as the degree to which the evidence already (directly or indirectly) collected by a particular observer supports the statement. • the “indefinite plausibility” of a statement, interpreted as the degree to which the observer believes that the overall body of evidence potentially available to him supports the statement. The indefinite plausibility is related to the ordinary plausibility, but also takes into account the potentially limited nature of the store of evidence collected by the observer at a given point in time. While the ordinary plausibility is effectively rep-resented as a single number, the indefinite plausibility is more usefully represented in a more complex form. We suggest to represent an indefinite plausibility as a quadruple <(L, U], b, k>, which when attached to a statement S has the semantics “I assign an ordinary plausibility of b to the statement that ‘Once k more items of evidence are collected, the ordinary plausibility of the statement S will lie in the interval [L, U]’.” Note that indefinite plausibility is thus defined as “second-order plausibility” – a plausibility of a plausibility. As we shall see in later sections of the paper, for most computational purposes it seems acceptable to leave the parameter k in the background, assuming it is the same for both the premises and the conclusion of an inference. So in the following we will speak mainly of indefinite probabilities as <(L, U], b> triples, for sake of simplicity. The possibility does exist, however, that in future work inference algo-rithms will be designed that utilize k explicitly. Now, suppose we buy the Bayesian argument that ordinary plausibility is best represented in terms of probability. Then it follows that indefinite plausibility is best represented in terms of second-order probability; i.e., as “I assign probability b to the statement that ‘Once k more items of evidence have been collected, the probability of the truth of S based on this evidence will lie in the interval [L, U]’.” 
4.4.1  An Interpretation in Terms of Betting Behavior To justify the above definition of indefinite probability more formally, one ap-proach is to revert to betting arguments of the type made by de Finetti in his work on the foundations of probability. As will be expounded below, for computational purposes we have taken a pragmatic frequentist approach based on underlying dis-tributional assumptions. However, for purposes of conceptual clarity, a more sub-jectivist de Finetti style justification is nevertheless of interest. So, in this subsec-tion we will describe a “betting scenario” that leads naturally to a definition of indefinite probabilities. Suppose we have a category C of discrete events; e.g., a set of tosses of a cer-tain coin, which has heads on one side and tails on the other. Next, suppose we have a predicate S, which is either True or False (Boolean values) for each event within the above event-category C. For example, if C is a set of tosses of a certain 

55 Chapter 4: Indefinite Truth Values  coin, then S could be the event “Heads.” S is a function from events into Boolean values. If we have an agent A, and the agent A has observed the evaluation of S on n different events, then we will say that n is the amount of evidence that A has ob-served regarding S; or we will say that A has made n observations regarding S. Now consider a situation with three agents: the House, the Gambler, and the Meta-gambler. As the name indicates, House is going to run a gambling operation, involving generating repeated events in category C, and proposing bets regarding the outcome of future events in C. More interestingly, House is also going to propose bets to Meta-gambler re-garding the behavior of Gambler. Specifically, suppose House behaves as follows. After Gambler makes n observations regarding S, House offers Gambler the opportunity to make what we‘ll call a “de Finetti” type bet regarding the outcome of the next observation of S. That is, House offers Gambler the opportunity: You must set the price of a promise to pay $1 if the next observation of S comes out True, and $0 if it does not. You must commit that I will be able to choose to either buy such a promise from you at the price you have set, or to require you to buy such a promise from me. In other words: you set the odds, but I decide which side of the bet will be yours. Assuming Gambler does not want to lose money, the price Gambler sets in such a bet is the “operational subjective probability” that Gambler assigns that the next observation of S will come out True. As an aside, House might also offer Gambler the opportunity to bet on se-quences of observations; e.g., it might offer similar “de Finetti” price-setting op-portunities regarding predicates like “The next 5 observations of S made will be in the ordered pattern (True, True, True, False, True).” In this case, things become interesting if we suppose Gambler thinks that: For each sequence Z of {True, False} values emerging from repeated observation of S, any permutation of Z has the same (operational subjective) probability as Z. Then, Gambler thinks that the series of observations of S is “exchangeable,” which means intuitively that S’s subjective probability estimates are really estimates of the “underlying probability of S being true on a random occasion.” Various mathematical conclusions follow from the assumption that Gambler does not want to lose money, combined with the assumption that Gambler believes in exchangeability. Next, let’s bring Meta-gambler into the picture. Suppose that House, Gambler and Meta-gambler have all together been watching n observations of S. Now, House is going to offer Meta-gambler a special opportunity. Namely, he is going to bring Meta-gambler into the back room for a period of time. During this period of time, House and Gambler will be partaking in a gambling process involving the predicate S. Specifically, while Meta-gambler is in the back room, House is going to show Gambler k new observations of S. Then, after the k’th observation, House is going to come drag Meta-gambler out of the back room, away from the pleasures of the flesh and back to the place where gambling on S occurs. 

Probabilistic Logic Networks 56 House then offers Gambler the opportunity to set the price of yet another de Finetti style bet on yet another observation of S. Before Gambler gets to set his price, though, Meta-gambler is going to be given the opportunity of placing a bet regarding what price Gambler is going to set. Specifically, House is going to allow Meta-gambler to set the price of a de Finetti style bet on a proposition of Meta-gambler’s choice, of the form: Q = “Gambler is going to bet an amount p that lies in the interval [L, U]” For instance Meta-gambler might propose Let Q be the proposition that Gambler is going to bet an amount lying in [.4, .6] on this next observation of S. I’ll set at 30 cents the price of a promise defined as follows: To pay $1 if Q comes out True, and $0 if it does not. I will commit that you will be able to choose either to buy such a promise from me at this price, or to require me to buy such a promise from you. I.e., Meta-Gambler sets the price corresponding to Q, but House gets to determine which side of the bet to take. Let us denote the price set by Meta-gambler as b; and let us assume that Meta-gambler does not want to lose money. Then, b is Meta-gambler’s subjective probability assigned to the statement that: “Gambler’s subjective probability for the next observation of S being True lies in [L, U].” But, recall from earlier that the indefinite probability <[L, U], b, k> attached to S means that:  “The estimated odds are b that after k more observations of S, the estimated probability of S will lie in [L, U].”  or in other words “[L, U] is a b-level credible interval for the estimated probability of S after k more observations.” In the context of an AI system reasoning using indefinite probabilities, there is no explicit separation between the Gambler and the Meta-gambler; the same AI system makes both levels of estimate. But this is of course not problematic, so long as the two components (first-order probability estimation and b-estimation) are carried out separately. One might argue that this formalization in terms of betting behavior doesn’t really add anything practical to the indefinite probabilities framework as already formulated. At minimum, however, it does make the relationship between indefi-nite probabilities and the classical subjective interpretation of probabilities quite clear. 
4.4.2  A Pragmatic Frequentist Interpretation Next, it is not hard to see how the above-presented interpretation of an indefinite plausibility can be provided with an alternate justification in relative frequency 

57 Chapter 4: Indefinite Truth Values  terms, in the case where one has a statement S that is decomposable in the sense described above. Suppose that, based on a certain finite amount of evidence about the frequency of a statement S, one wants to guess what one’s frequency estimate will be once one has seen a lot more evidence. This guessing process will result in a probability distribution across frequency estimates – which may itself be inter-preted as a frequency via a “possible worlds” interpretation. One may think about “the frequency, averaged across all possible worlds, that we live in a world in which the observed frequency of S after k more observations will lie in interval I.” So, then, one may interpret <[L, U], b, N> as meaning “b is the frequency of pos-sible worlds in which the observed frequency of S, after I’ve gathered k more pieces of evidence, will lie in the interval [L, U].” This interpretation is not as conceptually compelling as the betting-based inter-pretation given above – because bets are real things, whereas these fictitious pos-sible worlds are a bit slipperier. However, we make use of this frequency-based interpretation of indefinite probabilities in the practical computational implemen-tation of indefinite probability presented in the following sections – without, of course, sacrificing the general Bayesian interpretation of the indefinite probability approach. In the end, we consider the various interpretations of probability to be in the main complementary rather than contradictory, providing different perspec-tives on the same very useful mathematics. Moving on, then: To adopt a pragmatic frequency-based interpretation of the second-order plausibility in the definition of indefinite plausibility, we interpret “I assign probability b to the statement that ‘Once k more items of evidence are col-lected, the probability of the truth of S based on this evidence will lie in the inter-val [L, U]’” to mean “b is the frequency, across all possible worlds in which I have gathered k more items of evidence about S, of worlds in which the statement ‘the estimated probability of S lies in the interval [L, U]’ is true.” This frequency-based interpretation allows us to talk about a probability distribution consisting of prob-abilities assigned to values of ‘the estimated probability of S,’ evaluated across various possible worlds. This probability distribution is what, in the later sections of the paper, we call the “second-order distribution.” For calculational purposes, we assume a particular distributional form for this second-order distribution. Next, for the purpose of computational implementation, we make the heuristic assumption that the statement S under consideration is decomposable, so that in each possible world, “the estimated probability of S” may be interpreted as the mean of a probability distribution. For calculational purposes, in our current im-plementation we assume a particular distributional form for these probability dis-tributions, which we refer to as “the first-order distributions.” The adoption of a frequency-based interpretation for the second-order plausibil-ity seems hard to avoid if one wants to do practical calculations using the indefi-nite probabilities approach. On the other hand, the adoption of a frequency-based interpretation for the first-order plausibilities is an avoidable convenience, which is appropriate only in some situations. We will discuss below how the process of reasoning using indefinite probabilities can be simplified, at the cost of decreased 

Probabilistic Logic Networks 58 robustness, in cases where decomposability of the first order probabilities is not a plausible assumption. So, to summarize, in order to make the indefinite probabilities approach com-putationally tractable, we begin by restricting attention to some particular family D of probability distributions. Then, we interpret an interval probability attached to a statement as an assertion that: “There is probability b that the subjective probability of the statement, after I have made k more observations, will appear to be drawn from a distribution with a mean in this interval.” Then, finally, given this semantics and a logical inference rule, one can ask questions such as: “If each of the premises of my inference corresponds to some interval, so that there is probability b that after k more observations the distribu-tion governing the premise will appear to have a mean in that interval, then what is an interval so that b of the family of distributions of the conclusion have means ly-ing in that interval?” We may then give this final interval the interpretation that, after k more observations, there is a probability b that the conclusion of the infer-ence will appear to lie in this final interval. (Note that, as mentioned above, the pa-rameter k essentially “cancels out” during inference, so that one doesn’t need to explicitly account for it during most inference operations, so long as one is willing to assume it is the same in the premises and the conclusion.) In essence, this strategy merges the idea of imprecise probabilities with the Bayesian concept of credible intervals; thus the name “indefinite probabilities” (“definite” having the meaning of “precise,” but also the meaning of “contained within specific boundaries” – Walley’s probabilities are contained within specific boundaries, whereas ours are not). As hinted above, however, the above descriptions mask the complexity of the actual truth-value objects. In the indefinite probabilities approach, in practice, each IndefiniteTruthValue object is also endowed with three additional parame-ters: • An indicator of whether [L, U] should be considered as a symmetric or asym-metric credible interval. • A family of “second-order” distributions, used to govern the second-order plau-sibilities described above. • A family of “first-order” distributions, used to govern the first-order plausibil-ities described above. Combined with these additional parameters, each truth-value object essentially provides a compact representation of a single second-order probability distribution with a particular, complex structure. 
4.5 Truth-Value Conversions In our current implementation, we usually use <[L, U], b, k> IndefiniteTruth-Values for inference. For other purposes however, it is necessary to convert these 

59 Chapter 4: Indefinite Truth Values  truth values into SimpleTruthValues, in either (s,w) or (s,n) form. We now derive a conversion formula for translating indefinite truth values into simple truth val-ues. In order to carry out the derivation additional assumptions must be made, which is why the formula derived here must be considered “heuristic” from the point of view of applications. When the underlying distributional assumptions ap-ply, the formula is exact, but these assumptions may not always be realistic.  
4.5.1  Calculation of Approximate Conversion Formulas To derive conversion formulas we assume that the distributions underlying the means within the [L, U] intervals of the indefinite truth values are beta distribu-tions. Due to the conjugacy of the beta and binomial distributions, this means we can model these means as corresponding to Bernoulli trials.  In order to derive approximate formulas, we first consider the problem “back-wards”: Given b, n, and k, how can we derive [L, U] from an assumption of an underlying Bernoulli process with unknown probability p? We then reverse the process to obtain an approach for deriving n given b, k and [L, U]. Theorem: Suppose there were x successes in the first n trials of a binomial process with an unknown fixed probability p for success. Suppose further that the prior probability density f(p=a) is uniform. Then the probability that there will be (x+X) successes in the first (n+k) trials is given by  
! 
n+1()kX" # $ % & ' nx" # $ % & ' k+n+1()k+nX+x" # $ % & ' , 
where 
! " # $ % & '  indicates the binomial coefficient. Proof: The probability  
! Py successes in n+k trialsx successes in n trials( ) is the same as 
! Py"x successes in k trials( ). Letting X = y-x and assuming probability p for success on each trial, then this probability would be given by 
! kX" # $ % & ' pX1(p()k(X. The probability densities for p can be found from Bayes’ theorem, which states  

Probabilistic Logic Networks 60 
! fp=as=xn" # $ % & ' =fs=xnp=a" # $ % & ' fp=a()fs=xn" # $ % & ' . (1) 
Here f() denotes the appropriate probability density. Now f(p=a)=1 and since n is fixed, 
! fs=xn" # $ % & ' =fx successes in n trials( ), so  
! fs=xn" # $ % & ' =nx" # $ % & ' px1(p()n(xdp01) =1n+1. (2) 
Hence, 
! 
PX successes in k trials( )=n+1()kX" # $ % & ' 01( nx" # $ % & ' pX+x1)p()k+n)X+x()dp=n+1()kX" # $ % & ' nx" # $ % & ' k+n+1()k+nX+x" # $ % & ' .  (3) 
The theorem gives a distribution based on n, k and x; and then, applying b, we can find a symmetric credible interval [L, U] about s=x/n based on this distribu-tion.  Due to small deviations arising from integer approximations, given L, U, b and k, the reverse process is somewhat trickier. We now outline two approximate in-verse procedures. We first exhibit a heuristic algorithmic approach. From the re-sults of this heuristic approach we then develop an approximate inverse function. 
4.5.1.1 Heuristic Algorithmic Approach 
1. Let 
! L1=n+k()L+0.5" #n+k, and 
! U1=n+k()U+0.5" #n+k. 

61 Chapter 4: Indefinite Truth Values  
2. Calculate 
! b1=n+1k+n+1km" # $ % & ' nx" # $ % & ' k+nm+x" # $ % & ' m=lm=l+r(, where 
! x=nL+U()+0.5" #2, 
! l=n+k()L+0.5" #, and 
! r=n+k()U1"L1() . 3. Form the function v(n)=d[<[L1, U1], b1>, <[L, U], b>], where d[a,b] is the standard Euclidean distance from a to b. 4. Find the value of n that minimizes the function v(n). Aside from small deviations arising from integer approximations, n depends in-versely on the width U-L of the interval [L, U]. To find the n-value in step 4 we initially perform a search by setting n=2j for a sequence of j values, until we ob-tain a b value that indicates we have surpassed the correct n value. We then per-form a binary search between this maximum value N and N/2. We thus guarantee that the actual algorithm is of order O(log n). 4.5.1.2 Approximate Inverse Function Approach As an alternate and faster approach to finding n, we develop a function of L, U, k, and b that provides a reasonable approximation for n. We begin by plotting the cumulative probabilities given by equation (3) for various values of n, by fol-lowing the first two steps of the heuristic approach above. Aside from small devia-tions caused by the discrete nature of the cumulative distribution functions, each graph can be approximately modeled by a function of the form 
! prob=1"b=1"Ae"Bn. Inverting, we obtain 
! n="lnbA# $ % & ' ( B. For simplicity, we model the dependence of the coefficients 
! A and
! B upon the values of L, U, and k, linearly. From the data we gathered this appears to be a reasonable assumption, though we have not yet derived an analysis of the error of these approximations. We will use the notation 
! A=A1U+A2, 
! B=B1U+B2, 
! Ai=Ai1L+Ai2, 
! Bi=Bi1L+Bi2, 
! Aij=Aij1k+Aij2, and 
! Bij=Bij1k+Bij2, where 
! 1"i,j,k"2. Putting everything together we end up with  
! A=A11L+A12( )U+A21L+A22( )=A111k+A112( )L+A121k+A122[ ]U+A211k+A212( )L+A221k+A222[ ] and 

Probabilistic Logic Networks 62 
! B=B11L+B12( )U+B21L+B22( )=B111k+B112( )L+B121k+B122[ ]U+B211k+B212( )L+B221k+B222[ ] Finding the values of the coefficients Aij and B yields the following values:   
! A111=-0.00875486 
! A112=-2.35064019 
! A121=0.002463011 
! A122=-0.220372781 
! A211=0.010727656 
! A212=2.803020516 
! A221=-0.003647227 
! A222=0.437068392  
! B111=0.003032946 
! B112=-0.399778839 
! B121=-0.004302594 
! B122=0.930153781 
! B211=0.002803518 
! B212=-0.593689012 
! B221=-0.000265616 
! B222=-0.071902027   Observing that the dependence upon k is relatively negligible compared to the de-pendence upon L, U, and b, we can alternatively eliminate the k-dependence and use instead fixed values for A11=-2.922447948, A12=-0.072074201, A21=3.422902859, A22=0.252879708, B11=-0.261903438, B12=0.716893418, B21=-0.39831749, and B22=-0.107482534. 
4.5.2  Further Development of Indefinite Probabilities In this chapter we have presented the basic idea of indefinite truth values. The purpose of the indefinite truth value idea, of course, lies in its utilization in infer-ence, which is left for later chapters. But our hope is that in this chapter we have conveyed the essential semantics of indefinite probabilities, which is utilized, along the mathematics, in the integration of indefinite probabilities with inference rules. Some of the inferential applications of indefinite probabilities we encounter in later chapters will be fairly straightforward, such as their propagation through deductive and Bayesian inference. Others will be subtler, such as their application in the context of intensional or quantifier inference. In all cases, however, we have found the indefinite probability notion useful as a summary measure of truth value in a pragmatic inference context. In some cases, of course, a summary approxima-tion won’t do and one actually needs to retain one or more full probability distri-butions rather than just a few numbers giving a rough indication. But in reality one can’t always use a full representation of this nature due to restrictions on data, memory, and processing power; and thus we have placed indefinite probabilities in a central role within PLN. As compared with simpler summary truth values such as single probability numbers or (probability, weight of evidence) pairs, they seem to provide a better compromise between compactness and accuracy. 

63 
